 We have a very different sense of perfection, our perfection, the perfection of being, the perfection that runs through being existence. Washing my hands, so bony now, I've lost so much weight, I feel my body wasted away for just bones really. I can't see properly, I can't stand up, I don't have any balance. Washing my hands after I get to the toilet, trying to be careful because of the virus. So now we're in the touch of one hand on the other, so in the touch is some kind of perfection, some kind of beauty of God's grace, there's nothing to do with perfection in the way that we usually understand or think of it, becoming perfect. It's a way of seeing, it's very personal, it's universal and it's personal. Somehow love in there, somehow being known in there, knowing all of this is wrapped up in a perfection, a perfection wraps it up. Apparently it's through, it shoots through, it exudes it, it expresses it. Somehow feeling so bad, feeling so weak and tired and lost all, almost all, the capacities, somehow. Jesus' blessing is on everything, I don't know what that means, what does it mean? I don't know, the heart, meaning the heart of the soul knows something, feels something, senses something, opens something, realizes something. Jesus' blessing is on everything and that blessing is a perfection. It is the opposite, it's in exactly the accumulation of wonderful capacities, but the stripping away, the loss, the tukka, the misery, the incapacity. This word in theology, theodicy, is like trying to explain how the occurrence of difficult bad, even evil things, is congruent or makes sense with a good God. Theodicy has all these different theories and perspectives. Maybe it's something to do with more we need to run out of sensing the soul. The soul senses something, it opens and we glimpse something, we taste something, the heart knows something, the heart of our soul knows something, we see it, we feel it. Jesus' blessing is on everything, Christ's blessing is on everything, in everything. In the tukka itself, right there in the powerful tukka. It's a very different sense of perfection. 

Okay, here's another exercise. Remember, it's an act, it's only an exercise. It's some of the other things we've done. It's reminiscent or reminds me of, in a way, it's a variation of something we did on retreat, some of the exercises we did on retreat, movement, for what it's called. Sometimes, where we just moved. The body almost micron movements and held a posture. And saw what that did to the energy boy, to the emotions, to the soul, sense. If images arose or if not, you know, just an exercise. What we're doing here is training sensibility, training sensitivity. So, there's many possibilities. You can start with an image and then let the body, let the voice move from the image, move into the voice, express, manifest through the voice, through the posture of the movement. We start with the movement and see what happens in the soul. There's two ways around to do it. So, there's all kinds of variations. We're going to combine voice and gesture posture. This is just an exercise. I don't think we've done it before, this combination, but you can get to think in a certain way about exercises. It's not a big deal. It's like, like, so it's a screw on an airplane. It's missing. It might be a big deal. But in terms of the big air sort of structure of the aircraft, how it works, it's not such a big deal. It's not a central component. If it's missing, it might be a big deal. So, these exercises, you know, occasionally, for a while emphasizing them, whatever, feeling out cracks that have not been filled in the soulscape. Okay, so there's two elements, a sound element, sonic, a voicing element, and a gesture posture element, a movement element. So, for this, if we start with the sound, with the voicing, because with a little melody, it's just repeating. I'm seeing it more enunciating, more clearly than you need to. This sounds as part of your variation, how you sing it. It's just that fragment repeating with the syllable, for instance, bah, mah, mah, mah, mah. It's left to the exact, something like that, something rhythmically close to that. So, if you have no music, I'm holding roughly the long note for a count of three, six, and the rest is one each of six. I'm thinking six eighth notes, or six, mini, no, it's going to be cold, six semi-cortious, maybe. Anyway, so that's a vague thing that you voice with the syllable bah, just to start. And as you do it, you can do it standing up with what are your arms going to do? You can open them wide, like spread your arms down to the tips of your fingers, see the side parallel to the floor, it's a very open posture. You sing it like that, maybe there's a slight movement, like rotating, just very slightly, slowly side to side. So, the angle of your arms, the angle your arms makes with the body, with the feet, which are stationary, it changes slightly as you rotate, slowly and slightly. And really your job is to feel into this, feel into what that combination feels like, that movement, that gesture, that posture, and the sound, sounding. Maybe you have another posture gesture, which is your hands crossed, or crossed arm, you know, as if one hand up by one shoulder, the right hand up by the left shoulder, the left hand up by the right shoulder, and then hanging down from those that they cross over the outer, over the torso. And same melody, you don't have to sing it like I'm singing, I'm just trying to make it clear for you. And you do that together. What happens if you cross, fold your hand like people fold, you know, it must be a common posture to fold your hands across your chest, across your hands, across your arms, across your chest. Play with different postures of your hands, different slight movements. The same sounding melody. Maybe you want to vary the syllable, so it's not bah, but it's pa or ta or u or e, with the vowels, different vowels, so all kinds of combinations. You can do with this, with this, with what you're sounding, and with your gesture, posture movement. So go slow, take your time, but really repeat one for some minutes, so you really get into it and get a feel for what it's doing, if it's doing anything, and some of that might be very, very subtle. So you can vary your posture, your position, your movement, your gesture. It's number one. You can vary the pitch and the range at which you sing. Not the melodies at the moment, roughly what I'm singing, but it could go much higher in your range, so it's more comfortable. It could go as high as it's stretching your range, or low, low in the body, so it's stretching down there. So play with the register of what you're seeing, the pitch of what you're singing. That's another variation. And third variation is how loud. All the way from really loud to just not so loud to a whisper, to internally. I mean you can hear it internally. You keep playing with the other, you keep playing with the other aspects with the gesture, and the pitch. This is a lot of variation here. Your job is really exercising sensitivity again, so your job is really to feel into it. How does it feel? What happens in energy body? We're going to the wide meaning of energy body now. What happens in the emotional, in the emotions, in the emotional body? What happens if anything in image or soul, in soul, is it? It's very simple, lots of variations. It's really about sensitivity, about some exercise. You don't expect too much. Just your job is a sensitivity. And you can do the whole thing. One second, I've exercised with another melody that you come up with. It occurs to you, you're not just saying or fragment that you know from something that touches your soul. What happens when you sing it, when you voice it, when you sound it in these different ways, and your body moves, and your body gestures in these different ways, put them together. It's just an exercise in sensitivity. So that's to add to the collection of little exercises we had before. It's clear.

 Before I introduce exercise 5 or 5th set of exercises, I'd like to say a bit more about exercise 4 and a few more things there and add a possible variation for exercise 4. Let's say a few things. Given the instructions for exercise 4 and the first part with blessing, it would be quite normal, perhaps, or certainly understandable, to sort of hear those instructions and think, even if it's not a sort of very drawn-out discursive thinking, but something like think in the mind, okay, what does blessing look like or what does blessing sound like? What would that look like as a movement or gesture or what it sounds like? So there's a kind of process that's instigated by the mind, maybe by past associations with blessing, if we have any, because in our culture it's not a word that's in common currency anymore that has much currency outside of certain narrowing circles. But maybe we think, what does blessing look like and we draw upon past associations from here or there or whatever, so perhaps putting the hands on the head, in some traditions, that's part of how one blesses, one places one's hands on someone's head and utters a blessing, confers a blessing, or in other traditions sometimes marks a cross crucifix, a small crucifix on the forehead of the one blessed, or just gestures in the air marking a crucifix, all these very beautiful gestures from other traditions. Or I might think, what does blessing look like and it occurs to me, well, there's a bowing involved, it would be a very understandable connection to have made association to have, or the hands in Namaste in prayer pose pressed together, or for instance, the hands and the palms tracing over the energy body or even larger than the energy body of the one blessed and sort of conveying, conferring the energy of blessing through the hands over and into that space, penetrating the energy body, the energy field, the being with blessing through the hands and through that tracing of that movement. And so in thinking, so to speak, if we use that word thinking, this is what blessing looks like or sounds like, out of that thinking and those associations, etc., comes the movement, the gesture, or the vocalisation and all the vocalisation, all that's really great. And we've, in a way, I think, when we've done rituals and ceremonies on past retreats, for example, and included these kinds of instructions with blessings, etc., this is part of what's gone on for people and it's wonderful and it's beautiful and it can be very, very powerful. But it's possible just to open up the recognition or the possibility at times also of the whole, the propulsion and the instigation of the whole movement or gesture or vocalisation, not so much coming from an idea, not so much an idea leading to an action, an idea of blessing, an idea of what blessing looks like or associations, etc. So yes, that has its place, but just to invite, to open up a space for a possibility, a slightly different way of entering into this intention, starting, for instance, instead, just with the intention of blessing. Even if I'm not quite sure, as I said in the last talk, what that actually means for me. And let it be an open word. Go with what I've got. Let the word itself be a seed. Who knows what will germinate, what will sprout from that seed? Just start with the intention of blessing and just start moving, gesturing, vocalising, whatever it is, depending on which part of the exercise you're doing and the instructions. And so there's the intention, even if it's not quite clear what that exactly means, that word blessing, for instance, and just start moving with the intention, just start moving. And almost like with the incorporating the feedback, so to speak, from the movements, from the gestures, from the vocalisations that you're doing. So sensing, as you're moving, gesturing, vocalising, sensing, does this feel soulful? If I do this, does it feel more soulful? If I do that, does it feel less soulful? So just as we do with imaginal practice and soul-making practice, a part of one's awareness, very attentive, refined, careful, mindfulness on the sense of soulfulness in the moment. And what is supporting that and what is not supporting that? Where it opens and blossoms and grows and deepens and where it shuts down a bit or gets a bit flat or narrow. So it could be the sense of soulfulness, it could again be the sense of blessing, or both, of course. So what you're really doing is you're just starting with an intention and just starting moving with that intention. And whatever actions you're doing, whatever movements, gestures, vocalisations you're doing, you're almost receptive to, attuned to how that feels in line with the attention. So letting the movement, gesture, vocalisation shape the action in time as it goes. Playing it by ear, so to speak, or creating the pottery that whatever you're making on the potters, we're creating as you're going through the feel of it, through the feedback you're getting, through the signals of soul and of blessedness and blessingness that are coming back to you. Slightly different than starting with an idea and then kind of replicating that idea and perhaps then not putting so much attention on what feels soulful or what doesn't feel soulful. So they're both good, but just really want to open up that space. Now, if we have that space for that possibility, that second possibility, if we do it that second way, or if there is at least some of the time we're in that second mode, then a couple of things. One is what helps me be in that mode. It's quite difficult. It's actually quite difficult to dance, for example, and really, really be sensitive to the sense of soul-making in terms of the genuine, authentic imagination of all the elements and all that sensitive. It's actually quite difficult to do. So what would support it? Well, one thing may or may not be, I have to find out, do I need to slow down? So do I need to slow the whole movements down, for instance, or pause in between movements, or what? What's the kind of rhythm that allows me to read, to sense, to be attuned and receptive to the sense of soulfulness in the moment and whether it's being opened and supported or closed and not supported, or the sense of blessing. So what pace do I need to go at? It's just like doing walking meditation, doing any kind of walking meditation. There's always this question, what pace should I walk at? But right now, most helps whatever meditation I'm trying to do, whatever way of looking I'm engaging in that walking posture. So one is a question of pacing. It might be slowing it down. It might not be. I don't necessarily assume it is. But sometimes going slower allows us, affords us a greater sensitivity, a greater attunement and a greater reading of the soulfulness and the sense of soul making, the sense of blessing is there. So that's one thing that may be important. A second may just be, and this goes for so much, of course, is, you know, a degree that we're judging ourselves in the moment that will usually, almost always, shut down my sensitivity, my capacity to notice the sense of soulfulness and blessingness in the moment. So this is a strange, you know, by most people's, sort of by conventional behavior in our society, all this is pretty strange, some of these exercises, and this one in particular, may be very strange. And then you're doing it in a diet. So there's all kinds of reasons. It would be quite normal and expected for fear of judgment or self-judgment to arise, or, you know, silly or whatever it is. I look silly. I'm not getting it. I'm not doing it very well. Whatever it is. Is it possible to just let that go? Is it possible? It's a question. But I'll come back to that actually a little bit later. But to the degree that there's judging there, self-judging there, and fear of judgment from another, to that degree, it shuts down our sensitivity, generally speaking, but also in this particular exercise and the kinds of sensitivity we need in this particular exercise. But this second way of doing it, where we're sort of just focusing on the intention, planting the intention, letting the intention instigate and lead our actions, even if the intention is not fully comprehended by us. What does blessing mean? What does it mean to bless someone? I don't know. Maybe. Or I only know a little bit, or whatever it is. But in this second way of doing it, or second leaning, let's say, second emphasis, then we're letting that intention lead us, and just starting the movement and kind of reading it, surfing the whole situation, responding with our receptivity, with our sensitivity, responding to what we sense in terms of the soulfulness and the blessingness, and letting that shape, shape the movements, the gestures, the vocalizations we're doing. So we're letting the body and the energy body and the sense of the soulfulness in the moment guide the movements, the gestures, the vocalizations, at times at least, seeing if it's possible to lean into that mode, let's say more, sometimes at least, more than the other mode, which is a kind of, almost like a preconception, an idea, a notion, a memory, an association of blessing and what it looks like or sounds like. An idea of what the movements, gestures and vocalizations convey blessing. So both good, both fruitful, but see if you can sometimes get a sense of moving between those different modes, or at least between those two different emphases, let's say, because it might not be so black and white. So, as I said, this is quite a strange exercise by sort of conventional, from the perspective of conventional understandings and the way we conventionally understand what the voice is, etc., and how we use the voice, for example, how we communicate. So usually, of course, we use the voice and we think of the voice as an instrument, a vehicle, excuse me, through it, by which we share or communicate something. And that usually implies describing something. Through our voice we share, communicate and thus describe what I'm feeling or my story or something that happened or an idea or an image or whatever it is. And that's usually the way we relate to how we use the voice and what the voice is. We're communicating something through trying to describe it, to represent it, represent it. And even often, sometimes, when we're doing mantra practice or we introduce a chanting and we kind of hear, okay, this is the mantra, we learn the melody and the syllables or whatever, and part of us is thinking, okay, what does it mean? Or if not, what does it mean? What's the character of this mantra? Whose mantra is it? Which deity does it belong to? Ah, it's, for example, avallok kiteshvara. Then I know. Then something in your, then I know. It's invoking compassion because avallok kiteshvara. So that in the chanting of the mantra or the reciting of the mantra or whatever, I'm invoking, I'm thinking, I'm obviously concentrating on the sound, etc., and the voice, but I'm invoking the meaning of compassion. Even if those syllables, I don't know what they mean, and some of them don't actually mean anything. They're seed syllables that don't actually have meaning. Others are kind of seed meanings as well in different mantras. But anyway, oftentimes we as Westerners will want to know, who am I invoking? So that when I'm chanting the avallok kiteshvara or whatever, I'm, ah, it's compassion. Okay, and part of me is thinking about the meaning of compassion. And I don't mean a lot of discursive thought, but I mean the whole vibe of compassion, and I realize that that's what this mantra means. Now of course that's not wrong. It's not wrong at all for a mantra, and it wouldn't be wrong for the first part of this exercise, exercise four, where the intention is towards blessing, letting that word blessing be soft and elastic and expandable. But what if the sound itself as sound was sensed with soul, not to do with its meaning? This is where the second part of the exercise comes in. It may be there already coming through and being predominating even at times in the first part of the exercise where there is the blessing. So some sound itself sensed with soul, we're moving towards a jungle of sounds, a landscape of vocalizations, mysterious because not necessarily meaning anything, or at least not just meaning anything. Now I've said this before, you know, I've mentioned it several times, I don't know how much it's landed because again, I've been too quick, too brief in going through it, but the voice itself, my voice now is trying to convey certain meanings, and there's a logical path through what I'm saying, and each sentence is structured grammatically, syntactically and all that. But at the same time, there's a level of the sounds that you're hearing that transcends meaning. Yes, there's a meaning there, and hopefully you're listening for the meaning and you're understanding it so you can apply it in exercises, etc., and understand soul making and all that stuff. But there's also music here, there's also just the sensing the soul of the sound, the ineffable mystery of the sounds right now of my voice. And there's an unfathomable mystery in that if it's sensed with soul, if I can sense it with soul, it opens up a whole other, opens up other dimensions, but it opens up a whole other direction of dimensionality. So the dimensionality of any kind of verbal utterance can be through the meaning. So for instance, when we convey something and it's beautiful or poetic, or we convey an image or even convey our life story or something that happened or how we're feeling or an image, in the meaning of what we're conveying, we can convey mystery, the mystery of what we're conveying, the mystery of our being, the mystery of being in general, the unfathomability of it, for example, the unfathomability of the image. All that's conveyed when we share an image and the person gets the image or starts resonating with the image. So the person listening also dimensions, the dimensions of what is heard, of the sounds that are heard open up through meaning, but also not through meaning, through just sound themselves, sensing the soul of the sound themselves. Now, as I said, they can be there both at the same time if we enter a certain mode of listening and mode of speaking. So right now, for instance, the meaning of this and the dimensionality, the meaning of this and the sensing the soul of what's opened up through the meaning of what's being said in my voice, but also the dimensions that are opened up just through the sound, through the music of it, the mystery of it, the miracle of hearing and of sound, this particular sound right now, this particular music, different than other musics, unique particular. So both can be there at the same time depending on both how one is speaking but also how one is listening, whether we are sensing the soul, of course. In this exercise, especially in the second part of this exercise, we really want to emphasize, really in both parts, because we're not using verbal sounds, or we're not using traditionally understood verbal sounds or verbal sounds as traditionally understood in the first part of the blessing, but there's still meaning there. But in this exercise, especially in the second part, we want to emphasize that second direction of opening up dimensionality, beyond meaning, just in the sensing of the soul of the sounds themselves, the mystery of that, the incantation, the invocation, the spellmaking. So in terms of instructions for this exercise, number four, for the witness, the person who's just silently watching, sensing with all their senses and the whole energy body, remember, and listening and looking at the person, blessing or the person, moving, gesturing, vocalizing. In a way, the exercise there, or the emphasis of the exercise, is really just on noticing. And I think we demonstrated this at the beginning, if I remember, of that, I've forgotten what it's called now, movement, movement and voice and the possibilities of the soul or something like that. And Catherine, I demonstrated it as a diet, and I asked her to move, and she made very, very subtle movements, very subtle. In fact, almost none. She hardly did anything apart from blink a few times, if I remember. But if I'm open enough, then the whole body in relationship, sensing with the whole energy body, we've talked about this several times, bringing the whole energy body into sensual relationship there, without touching in this case, then even the blinking of an eye, I'm going to notice that that has an effect in my energy body, even in my emotional body and in my soul. Actually, any movement, any gesture, any vocalization will affect the energy body, and let's say the emotions, but we're talking about very, very subtle. If it's a very subtle movement, it might be very subtle, because it might be very, very strong, depends on all kinds of things, of course. But there's no pressure for the witness for it to be this or that experience. Really, I'm just noticing what are the effects I notice in my energy body and in the field with these movements, gestures, vocalizations, pauses, silences, all the rest of it. Just noticing. It doesn't have to be this or that. So it becomes, for the witness, so to speak, for that person in that role, it becomes really an exercise in relational sensitivity, and that's the emphasis. For the person who's moving or gesturing or vocalizing, it may be that one is really quite baffled by these instructions, or it goes along okay, and then one becomes just a bit completely stumped or at a loss of what to do or how to move or what to vocalize, etc. So again, we'd be very understanding, very normal, and completely okay. So if that happens, one way of responding to that is just pause, just stop, and just sense. Sense the self, sense the other, sense the space that you're in, sense the energy body, sense what's going on emotionally, and just be with that sense. And out of that sensing in the pause without pressure, then maybe allowing yourself to pause. In other words, not feeling like I have to keep doing something, I have to keep producing some kind of movement or gesture or vocalization. Allowing yourself to stop, pause, and sense, and taking the pressure off that way, but remaining attentive and connected and alive and attuned to the experience of self, other world, energy body, and emotional body. And then perhaps out of that, out of that sensitivity and attunement in the pause comes the instigation, the seed of the next movement or gesture or voice. So that would be one response. Another is kind of the opposite or complementary, which is don't stop. Okay, so I'm baffled and stumped and a bit at a loss what to do, but just kind of just see if you can just keep moving or gesturing. As I said before, actually let the material, in other words, the movement, the gesture, the voice still be there, the material is still there. You're not taking your hands off the clay on the potter's wheel. You're not taking your hands off the piano. You keep moving off on the piano and there's making sounds as you move them and you're responding to the sounds that you hear and to how they make you feel and your sense of them. So rather than stopping the vocalization and the gesture of the movement, you actually just keep going. Don't stop. Don't let the bafflement or stumpness or confusion stop. You just keep going. But sense as you're doing so and see if you can follow what feels in any way soulful. So again, I've got on the piano, as I'm bashing away, I'm confused, I don't know, I'm not a piano player, what the hell am I doing? I don't know. But when I do this, I press these ones down there, for example, in the low register I press them very soft. Oh, yeah, okay. Very soft and quiet in the low register and it's kind of dissonant. Okay, well that creates something and I can kind of feel a certain mood with that and there's a little something moving in my energy body and soul and then it occurs to me just out of that very sensitivity that something, little darts of notes high up on the high end of the piano will complement that. And so I do that, I'm not a piano player, I don't know what I'm doing. I'm just responding to the feel but I don't stop the flow of the material, the flow of the piano analogy and I don't stop the flow of the sounds which come from the movement of my fingers hitting the keys and in this exercise I don't stop the flow of the material, it means I don't stop moving, gesturing and vocalizing. But I'm just tuning in and sensing as it rolls along, as there's this flow of the material and I follow what feels, as best as I can, what feels in any way soulful. So like I said before I'm letting the material shape the creation rather than the sort of pause and the inner sense and silence and then a sort of creation, ex nihilo sort of thing or this kind of preconceived notion or idea of what it looks like, whatever I'm trying to do. So as I mentioned, it would be quite normal for sort of self-consciousness to arise for the person moving, gesturing, vocalizing and it might be all kinds of things, variations on that fear of looking silly, of sounding silly, of seeming silly, of being thought of silly, a fear of being blocked and then being judged as blocked or just judging myself as being blocked, could be all kinds of things. You know, again, so much depends on background and history and conditioning and upbringing and all that stuff as well as many other things, personality and soul style. But it might be that we even expect that, we expect self-consciousness and awkwardness and a kind of a little bit of fear of judgment, etc. to come up. Maybe it's good to just expect that and to include it. So include it as an expectation but also include it if it comes up and sometimes it may not need very much. Just keep going and it's included just through mindfulness, okay? The mindfulness just expands to include that, oh, okay, there's self-consciousness going on as well. There's a bit of anxiety or a lot of anxiety about looking silly or whatever it is or sounding silly. Can there be a bit more space in the consciousness because anxiety will contract the space of the awareness? And sometimes just creating a bit more space can help. Self-consciousness can arise and in the very nature of what we mean by self-consciousness in that sense is a kind of unskillful contraction of the attention of the consciousness to the self, not a sort of skillful and careful and caring examination or inquiry or awareness of self-experience, but a kind of contraction, almost like an obsessive attention that's out of balance and contracted so that opening up the awareness, for instance, to more sound to the space of the room that you're in, especially if it's a large room, to the sky, et cetera, just that opening out of more space for the attention, for the awareness counteracts the contraction that's inherent really in self-consciousness, in that kind of afflictive self-consciousness. And that also tends to be intrinsic to states of anxiety as well. So sometimes just opening out the attention, continuing the practice, doing what we're doing here, working with the dyads, but just opening out the attention, still aware of the other, still aware of what one is doing, the movements, gestures, and the whole resonances of all of that, vocalizations, aware of self, energy body, all of that, aware of other, but also all that in a larger space, just that movement, that opening out of the attention to include more, to cover a broader space, to encompass an open to a broader space can be really helpful as one continues with the practice. And of course, again, the fear of judgment from others or self-judgment, et cetera, you know, how important are the qualities of meta and compassion? And so, as always, with these kind of dyad exercises, we've talked about this before, but to stress it again, can be so helpful as part of setting up the space, the field, setting up the dyads, setting up the temenos. We include either deliberately and formally, or rather formally, we include a specific matter practice. And it can be just a few seconds or a few minutes or longer, whatever. We can set that up at the beginning. Or, as we said, we've been through all this before, we talked about temenos sometimes, but we're just, you're with a person, and you can rest assured that there's temenos there. You don't have to actually restress it. But setting up in the beginning, if certain exercises or situations are likely to trigger self-consciousness, self-anxiety, fear of judgment, fear of self-judgment in a critic, all that, then taking care to actually put a little more emphasis and spend a little more time setting up the temenos at the beginning or rather the aspect of, aspects of matter and compassion within the temenos can be really, really useful. And that matter and compassion can also be, you know, something that we introduce, just pause. Something's happening, it's getting in the way, I feel blocked here, there's a lot of judgment or fear of judgment or whatever it is. And just pause that and pause the exercise and you can voice that. And there is an actual articulation of something to the diode partner or not voice it. It could be silent and one's just, okay, let's just spend a bit of time with matter and compassion and not necessarily telling the other what I'm doing right then. But just in that pause, however long it is, moving into a matter and compassion practice. And I would suggest matter and compassion for oneself, certainly, because that's where the affliction is, but also for the other. And maybe even again, a sense of a larger space, the space that you're in imbued with matter and compassion, a field of matter and compassion in which you are both sitting. So all these are possibilities if or when self-consciousness arises. And then it may be to just briefly touch on or offer a few other possibilities, it may be too that there's something accessible or a sense accessible, a perception accessible in the diode at that time of oneself, of the other, of the space that you're in, of the whole environment, the world, that they can be sensed with soul. And some perception of sensing something or other with soul in all that configuration may be really helpful. And so that may have perhaps started to happen, perhaps earlier in the exercise and you can bring it back, bring it back a bit more deliberately or lean on it a bit more. Because when they're sensing with soul, it will tend to counter that kind of rarefied and contracted self-consciousness, self-obsession, because that's not really a soul movement. Maybe a kind of squeezed, impoverished reflection of what's originally a soul movement, but in itself it's not. So when we sense with soul, something opens that out. So there's actually all kinds of possibilities, but you can expect it to include it, this possibility of self-consciousness and the affliction of that. You don't have to fight it. You can also allow it, but also place it humbly, so to speak, in the sight of the angels, in the purview, in the holding of the angels. What does that mean? Well, it's an open statement. What that means to your soul, what that means in that situation. Of course, it's very connected to what you said about the sensing of soul. You can deliberately draw on or reignite a certain sensing of soul, a certain image or an imaginal sense of what's happening that places this very self-consciousness and problem of that in the sight of the angels, in the holding of the angels, in the lap of the angels. See what that does. One can also, for instance, just recognize that one's fullness of intention or reignite one's fullness of intention as one of the elements of the imaginal. So why am I doing this? What's the primary intention? Is it to look good, to impress? Is it just simply to avoid being judged or to avoid, you know, looking silly or whatever? Of course, no one's going to start an exercise like this, a dyadic exercise like this, in soul-making with that limited intention. But very easily and without our recognizing it, our intention can slip in a fraction of a moment or just gradually it can slip so that what started perhaps as a fullness of intention toward everything that soul-making beckons us to open to and move toward. What can start as that ends up shrunken to an intention, again, without our realizing it quite easily, of just trying to get through the exercise, just trying to get through the time, make it through the time with the minimum of looking silly or judgment being judged. Again, it's not to judge that slipping from a fullness of intention. Fullness of intention is a very, as I've said many times, quite rare, it's rare for that element to really be there in its fullness. So we're just reminding ourselves and recognizing that capacity of the soul, that inclination of the soul, in fact, that eros of the soul that wants to have a fullness of intention. It's already there as a soul desire. Remember, fundamental action of all soul-making teachings is soul-wants soul-making. So in a way, that desire, that eros of the soul for soul-making is the most primary desire of the soul. So it's already there, and it's a matter of just recognizing it, recognizing it, reminding ourselves of it, re-accessing it, as opposed to judging that it's not there at that moment. It's a difficult one, but it's also the most fundamental one. Interesting. And, you know, just another level, kind of less soulful, if you like, but just remind yourself, or recognize the fact this is an exercise, an exercise in a practice. It's not a performance. I'm not performing for the other. I'm not performing for myself or the teacher or the sangha or whatever it is. It's an exercise in a practice, and that means it doesn't have to be perfect. When we're very first teachers said to me, if everything was perfect, why would you need to practice? It's an exercise, a practice, and an exploration. So all kinds of things are going to happen, and I'm not going to get it totally right and be amazing, dazzling all the time. Very much at the time it's an exercise. So all kinds of possibilities if or when self-consciousness arises in that kind of afflictive way. What can happen as we do this exercise number four, or many of these exercises with movement, gesture, voice, is that something in the larger constellation, the larger configuration of what is present, what is unfolding, something in that larger constellation may at some point ignite and become image. So it could be a kind of general sense of divinity. Divinity is present in all of it or in some elements of it, shining through it, being refracted through some or all of the components, the constituents of what's happening at any time. It may be that the movement, the gesture, the voice themselves become imaginal. We sense them with soul. It may be the sense of self. It may be the sense of even something like tradition. And you might feel like, well, what tradition is this? I've never done anything like this. Sort of nonsense syllables and improvised movements that don't have any meaning, that look potentially very silly probably to most people. What tradition is that? Well, I don't know, but it doesn't matter. They may still be an imaginal sense of tapping into and finding being in the stream of some kind of imaginal tradition. And that could be a tradition of the imaginal or just an imaginal tradition, some esoteric practice of sacramentalizing, of making holy. And as things become image, or if things become image, you know, reminding none of them need to be very clear and well defined in order to be an imaginal image with soul-making power. I mean, exactly clear what my image of the tradition is or what exactly the image, you know, if I had to describe the image of the self. Maybe it's hard to describe. Maybe it's not so vivid, not so well defined. But it can still, I've said this so many times in talks over the last years, it can still have tremendous soul-making power without being clearly defined and perceived on a sensorial level. So it can be fully authentically imagined, it can be a fully imaginal image without being necessarily clear or well defined. It could be an image of the other. It could be an image of the space we're in. Where are we when we're doing this? When this is happening? Or if you like the time that we're in. There's a sense of even just fragments or moments in this exercise of the blessing and being blessed, of moving and gesturing and vocalizing in a way that's beyond meaning. There's a sense of, even moments of that could be reflecting something that is always already happening. We are playing something out. We are analogues of an image that is always already happening in hierophanic time. And as always, when something ignites, some constituent of the larger constellation configuration becomes image, just like with the elements of the imaginal. When one of them ignites, then it's possible that the whole then ignites and the whole thing is then perceived at a whole other level of sensing the soul and the whole level of selffulness, sense of selffulness and soul making there. So that's part of one of the possibilities of what may happen here in different directions. Now instead I wanted to introduce a variation for this exercise number four. And that is, and in a way it's kind of related to what I've just said, but it's a deliberate move rather than something that might just occur spontaneously. And that variation, that possibility is that it still remains a dyadic exercise, an exercise in a dyad, but your dyad partner is actually a so-called intracycheic image. You're not doing this with another actual physical human being. You're doing this in dyadic relationship with an image. Same thing though. So you take your turn to move the body and make gestures and vocalize to the angel, to your angel who is your dyad partner, to the image there, to the imaginal figure. And then you receive in your imagination the movements, the gestures, the vocalizations, the blessing and just the mystery of that communication from the angel in your imagination. And in the first of those two possibilities, when it's your turn to move, gesture, vocalize to the angel, to the image. Again, like in other exercises, it could be that that is physically concretized. In other words, someone else looking on, a third person looking on, could see you move, see your physical body move and gesture and hear you. Or it could be again just in the energy body and in the imaginal sense, in the image sense, in the imagination. So there's a whole other variation for this one, which is in a purely, if you like, purely imaginal dyad. Why? Well, there's a few reasons for opening up that variation or suggesting that variation at times. One is in original we said before that it may be that doing it on our own, we are, especially if we're on our own in a room somewhere, that we're actually less self-conscious because we're not being, so if that's an issue, if that comes up as it might for some people, that actually just doing it on one's own in the privacy of one's own meditation space, just with the imaginal figure, that there's less chance of self-consciousness rising because we're less under the, or we feel ourselves less under the scrutiny of another human being. But secondly, there's also a possibility, not necessarily, but a possibility that in doing it with an imaginal figure as your dyad partner, that the whole thing can actually become more subtle. The whole thing has to be, it's almost like because perhaps we're in relationship with a more subtle entity, an imaginal figure, our movements, gestures and vocalizations can be allowed to become correspondingly subtle. They have to, where? Less pulled into the gross, and there's a related reason, a third reason related to that, opening up a possibility of allowing the movements, gestures, vocalizations to become more subtle, which, as I've said many times, imaginal practice, soul-making practice, but also in other practices, oftentimes the movement into depth is a movement into more subtlety. So we really want to keep that range of things, the more subtle range, open and keep exploring it, not at the exclusion of the grosser, but just a reminder that sometimes the more subtle is actually more powerful and more fertile and more profound. As I've said, tied in, there might be a third reason, which is for doing it this way sometimes, doing it within intrapsychically, so to speak, is that we may, it may allow the movements, gestures and vocalizations to be more unusual, stranger, and in the sense that whatever we're doing in moving and gesturing and vocalizing, it no longer has to look or sound like so much, like praising, or anything recognizable at all. It may be, at least, that maybe some of the pressure that may be constraining movements, gestures, vocalizations, and also perceptions of sensing the soul, gets removed by removing the physically present other. It may be, it may be, for other times or with other people, it worked the other way. The actual presence of a physical human being with all their dimensions allows something, allows what comes through me, and what I allow myself to do, allows that to have more range, both in subtlety and in kind of the unusualness of what I'm doing. But do it both ways, play both ways, with an actual human being, a physically present human being, and with an intrapsychic image. So maybe there are a few reasons why this helps with just doing it with an imaginal figure, not with a physically present human. Fourth reason why is, I'm just going to touch on this briefly and just say, it may be that the soul needs some things that are, so to speak, only between me and the angels. Their secrets, their soul secrets, their treasures and precious confidences between me and the angels, and only between me and the angels, only between you and your angels. And it might be as much as the soul needs to realise its soul making and its sensing the soul in relationship with material reality, if you like, physical beings, actual human beings, and again the whole range and dimensionality of what that means, material reality and nature and human beings. As much as that's the case as a support and a foundation and the field for a lot of soul making, it may still be that the soul still at times needs some things that are only between me and the angels, only between you and the angels. So there's a variation there of this exercise number four. And remember, if you are doing it, particularly if you're doing it with, it may be more likely, sort of, we should call it near enemy or far enemy, but certainly a deviation, a perversion a little bit from the intention of the practice, whether it's more likely to come up if we're doing it without a physical human being present in a diet with just the angel. It's more likely, I'm not sure, for it to come up. Remember, we're not here seeking information. So if the imaginal figure, the angel, is gesturing and moving in my imagination or vocalising towards me, I'm not in that communication, in that sharing, in the very broad senses of those words, I am not seeking information. That is not my primary intention by far. That kind of thing may occur at time, but it's not equivalent to soul making. Knowing the future or this or that happens or something psychic or whatever like that. It may occur at times, sure, it may occur, but it's not the same thing as soul making. It's not the primary intention. Usually, when the intention goes into that kind of thing, that's when I'm seeking information. Usually, that information is for the sake of a rarefied self and what this self can get or how it can grandise itself in some way. And then, what we refer to for the fullness of intention has slipped at that point, where it hasn't been allowed to supersede that other narrow intention for the self. What can I get here? The issues of power and self-aggrandizement come in. When there's the fullness of intention that those other intentions get pacified and they get hugely superseded, the fullness of intention is much more powerful, much more primal, fundamental, beautiful, sacred intention and these other intentions that have more to do with the rarefied self and power and what it can get, etc. So that's exercise four, diet exercise with two main variations in terms of whether we do it with an actual human being, with a soul making partner or with an imaginary figure and angel, and also the variations to do with whether it's intentionally blessing or just moving completely beyond communicating any meaning, and also the variations of which aspects of movement, gesture and voice of those three aspects, but which combinations of those are included and allowed at different times. So lots of variations within there, within exercise four. Okay, so exercise five, again, it might be viewed as a series of exercises. I'm not really sure quite what to call it. I'm not sure it needs a name, but in a way it's really thinking about kind of iconic moments, iconic movements and gestures and entering into their movements, gestures and moments that can become iconic for us and those that can themselves become image or have for a culture at different times themselves or subcultures become iconic. So for example, well, I say what the exercise is. The exercise is to take one of these moments and embody it. Let it feel into the soul sense of that moment and then let your body and your voice and your gesture and movement embody it. Let the energy body and the soul sense really get a sense and then see what comes. So in a way, this might sound, okay, that's a bit easier, but the level that I want to talk about it at is perhaps a little more unusual and so perhaps even a little bit stranger than some of the other stuff. So the first one we might call, and again, very tentative with names here, but something like the Via Dolorosa, you know that name, from the Passion of Christ when Christ had been sentenced to death by crucifixion, by Pontius Pilate, then he was beaten, etc. and then was given this cross, but this heavy cross, and those who were going to be crucified had to carry their own crosses, you know, weakened and injured from torture and mistreatment and imprisonment, etc. and they had to still carry their crosses to the place, to Golgotha, where they were going to be crucified, going to be executed basically. And if you know from the Catholic tradition, there's the stations of the cross that they do every year, and there's certain moments on that whole path that get kind of contemplated, meditated upon in that meditation on the stations of the cross. But that whole journey towards one's execution, that's the iconic movement or moment. So Christ carrying his cross, it could be on the Via Dolorosa, it doesn't have to be Christ, it could be someone anywhere about to be executed. It could be, again, borrowing from the Christian tradition, the martyrs about to be thrown to the lions, or walking out into the amphitheater, and before the lions, they know what's coming, maybe they can even see or hear the lions, and they're just there in that amphitheater, in the moments before their execution, before their death. And what's key in this also is that they are surrounded, or Christ, or this person who's executed, or the martyrs in the amphitheater, or someone before a firing squad, is surrounded by those who are certainly willing one's death, but even more than that, they're mocking and jeering. It may or may not be everyone in the crowd, but certainly a good portion, and maybe everyone, is mocking and jeering the victim of execution. And yet, so this is all part of him describing this moment, and yet, the one about to be executed has faith. What does that mean? Faith in what? Has a sense of the angel somehow. Has perhaps even a sense of themselves as image, or even the whole scene as image, and the whole event as image, and the whole transpiring of their execution and death, and the mockery, and the loneliness, has a sense of somehow, in this horrific and tragic death, execution, brutality, there is somehow my telos here. This is somehow part of what I've been called towards. Somehow, this is part of my fulfilling my duty to the angels, to the Daemon, to the Divine, to the images. It's not that the horror, and the suffering, and the death itself themselves, or taken alone, so to speak, or that form the telos, the constitute the telos, but rather they are somehow part of a piece of a much larger soul movement and soul duty, because of how the soul is moving through the whole thing, how the soul is relating to it. It's that together with the suffering. And also because of what and who the soul is standing with. Because of what and whom the soul is standing with and standing for. It's this standing with and standing for, and the how of the ways in which the soul is moving through that dukkah, that suffering, and seeing it, and sensing it with soul, and relating to it, that this becomes, well this becomes somehow, mysteriously part of a larger, wider, and more profound telos, movement of soul. And of course, it may well be, as well, that amongst all these, the sense of rightness, and the presence of the angel, the dimensionality, and all that, it may be, probably would be, that amongst all that, there can certainly be, probably will be some fear, some terror, some sense of torment, some doubt, sense of loss and grief, of course, a sense of the soul being stretched to its limits by what it's being asked to go through, almost perhaps to breaking point, whatever that might mean. So those, that kind of complex emotional and soul, complex of emotional and soul reactions can be there too. So this is plenty here, it can be very, very rich. So it could be any of those, it could be Christ, that that works for you, Christ carrying the cross on the Idarosa, it could be the Christian martyrs to the lions, it could be just someone somewhere, some time before a firing squad being executed, perhaps they're a political prisoner, and they're being executed for speaking the truth, speaking out against power. The outer environment of that whole image has with it this jeering, and this incredible cruelty, but also jeering. The inner environment, so to speak, or the soul environment has with it faith, a sense of the angel, a sense of sensing the soul, self as image, other, maybe the whole scene as image, a sense of one's telos, one's duty, again, could be really quite specific or really not very specific. And the exercise here, this is the first part of exercise five, and they don't have to be in any order, I think there's four parts for now we could add or change some or whatever, I'm just throwing out some examples here. But in this first one then, one might just stand there, standing in the amphitheatre, standing before the firing squad, or it could be the walking, walking towards the place where they put you to be executed, or whatever it was, walking out to the middle of the amphitheatre. So that's the image. And your job is again to sense into what, in that whole vague description I've given in those possibilities, and there could be plenty of other possibilities, that kind of thing, getting a sense, a soul sense for it, sensing it in the energy body, listening to the energy body, listening to the emotional and soul resonances, and then just seeing what movements, gestures, voice, or vocalizations want to come. So I'm going to give the second one, and then I'm going to say something to qualify this whole exercise. The second one is an iconic moment from the Buddhist tradition, the Bhumi-Sparashya Mudra, which means the gesture, a mudra is a gesture, Bhumi is earth or ground, and Sparsha is to touch. So it's the gesture of the Buddha touching the earth. You've seen this statue, maybe you would have seen this statue with his right hand sitting there in a meditative posture by the Buddha's right hand touching the earth. And this goes back to the mythological story on the night of his awakening, and the Buddha-tavi was sitting there meditating, practicing for awakening, and Mara comes and challenges him and attacks him in all kinds of ways. And one of the challenges was, what right do you have to sit there? What right do you have to sit in that spot striving for awakening, and to have taken that vow that you won't move from that spot until awakening? What right do you have to sit there? And the Buddha in response said, a gesture to touch the earth and asked the earth to bear witness, the earth goddess, to bear witness to his right to sit there, sit in that spot on the earth and work for awakening. And the earth did exactly that, and obviated, counted Mara's challenge. So this gesture of touching the earth and calling on the earth to testify, to bear witness to the right to sit there, to take a vow of immovability in one's quest for awakening, and to sit there and to strive and to be awakened. So that's the Bhoomi-Sparashamudra, Bhoomi-Sparashamudra. So it's part of Buddhist iconography, of course, part of Buddhist mythology. It's another iconic moment. So that would be a second example for this exercise. Now let's qualify this a little bit, because what we're not doing here is a kind of acting exercise. So this refers to some of the other exercises that I've been offering over the course of this talk. We're not doing an acting exercise. So it's not like, oh, how convincing a portrayal can I give of this or that iconic moment? Or even if someone didn't know what I was acting out, if I was miming something, would they guess exactly what it was? Oh, that's Christ on the Vyadarosa with his cross. We're not interested in an exercise in acting and developing our acting skills. We're not interested, therefore, in what it looks like to an outside observer. That, what it looks like to an outside observer, is much less important than your sense of the energy body, the emotional body, and the soul sense of what's happening. So what that means in terms of movement is that movement gestures and vocalizations, you may not be decipherable to someone else. Someone looking at you may have no sense that you're feeling into and letting come through your body and voice, the Christ on the road to Golgotha. You may have no sense that you're this kind of person waiting to be executed. Much more important is that, so to speak, inner sense, the energy body, the emotional sense, and the soul sense, and just how that wants to move the body. So the how is, I'm not moving it so that it can look like, so that someone could recognize and say, oh, it's that. It's just, here's the situation that I'm trying to sense into, the kind of moment I'm trying to sense into, and trying to feel that with my whole energy body and all the resonances in the heart and the soul. And then what movement or gestures want to come? That express it, that are in response to it, that just hold it, that support the soul sense. So even there, slightly different intentions. And again, I'm using my sense of the soul resonances, etc., in the energy body sense, the emotional sense, to see what does help. What helps me kind of cohere the movement, the gesture, the voice, the soul sense, the energy body, the emotional body there. So we go back to the exercise three. Yes, I think the last part of exercise three was what I called the serpent. And if you remember, I was kind of careful to say, what that is, what's the serpent? So again, one could hear that and think, okay, so now I have to move my body in a way that looks like a snake. So maybe I get on the ground, I put my arms by my side and I sort of wriggle around or ride around or move, find a way of moving kind of like a snake and then, oh, it's a snake or it's a worm or something, someone could tell. That's not the point. That wasn't the point in that exercise either. And it may be also that in these kind of exercises that with a serpent or these ones we've just talked about, it may be that there's, and of course with the Buddha's Bhoomi Sparshan Mudra, one could actually just replicate that movement. And of course, that's very easy to do. Just take your hand and you touch the earth. But what we really want is the whole kind of arena and nexus and field of heightened sensitivity and soul sense and resonance. And then one's open to all kinds of other movements, gestures and vocalizations as well. But it may be that actually in this exercise with the serpent or one of these from this exercise number five, that there's actually not much movement or sound at all. I'm just standing in front of the firing squad, but all everything else that's endemic to that image, in the larger sense of the image, the sense of duty, the sense of angel, the sense of calling and telos, and also the mystery of that, as well as the sorrow, as well as the fear, the beauty of that, the sense of faith, the sense of knowing one is doing the right thing, all of that, the nobility, all that is there. And it may or may not transfer to much movement or sound at all, but that's the key thing. So one goes from that, so to speak, inner, imaginal sense, the energy body sense. So this sensitivity is more important. And in a lot of these exercises, the emphasis on the sensitivity is even more than a sort of clarity of an image. So we've mentioned several times, it's actually quite hard to, let's say, dance, and at the same time have a genuinely imaginal image, a fully authentically imaginal image, at the same time as one is dancing, it's actually quite difficult. And it's not to say that one might not feel a kind of soulfulness in dancing, or really enjoy it, or it's wonderful in all kinds of ways, or it's soul-making in some ways, but actually to hold a fully authentic imaginal image and be in relation to that image, and dance at the same time in a way that both the dancing and the image, the soulfulness of both, and the sensing with soul of both is mutually enhanced and mutually woven together and implicated. That's actually quite hard for most people, even most people who have a practice of dance, etc., and of the imaginal, to really knead them together, stitch them together, is actually quite difficult. So more important, I think, in a lot of these exercises is the sensitivity, more important than, say, the clarity of an image, or even the presence of an image in some cases, and sometimes can be better then to start with the idea of developing the sensitivity to subtlety and going from there. So we've said that before. Okay, so throughout four possibilities for this fifth exercise of iconic moments, and the third, again, I don't quite know what to call it, perhaps, waiting for the angels, or the hospitality to the angels. Some of you may have come across, there's a couple of online seminars that I did some months ago, and they were filmed, and so they're somewhere rather on the web, I think. And a couple of them are, well, I think there's a set of 11, but a couple of them have the title of something like Dharma and Art, or Arts and Dharma, or something like that. And one of the things, one of the illustrations I used for something I was trying to communicate was an icon by Rublev, quite a famous icon in the Orthodox Church, it has two names. One is the Trinity and one is the hospitality of Abraham, and it refers to an Old Testament story of Abraham in his tent, in the wilderness, in the desert, and he sees three travelers walking through the desert and he runs out to meet them and makes them at home, offers his hospitality to them, and they turn out to be angels, three angels. And so he feeds them and gives them a drink and gives them a cool place to rest, etc., in the shade. And so that fragment of a story from the Old Testament, from Genesis, Abraham's hospitality to the angels. So if you do, if you have come across, or if you do in the future come across those Arts and Dhammas seminars, then what I'm talking about here for the purpose of this exercise is really the moment or the time prior to the scene in the icon, because the scene in the icon is actually just the three angels. Abraham is no longer there, and the three angels, or the three, if you like, persons of the Holy Trinity, are just there at the table having received Abraham's hospitality. So this refers, in this exercise we're focusing on the time prior to that, on Abraham and his openness of soul, his soul and terror, his receptivity, his hospitality to the angels and the imaginal figures. So what exactly is prescribed as a movement or a gesture or a vocalization there? I don't know. But what would it be just to take that? It's quite, as I said, at one level, some of these, this exercise I'm a family choir, so I'm just acting something, but when it's not even obvious what movement goes with it, and I'm not even that interested in it looking like that scene, then it becomes an exercise at a whole other level to do with sensitivity and attunement and openness and just seeing a connecting soul movement, gesture, voice. It's not at all obvious what's the kind of prescribed movement gesture voice there. Can I feel my way in? And how do I feel my way into that? Maybe I don't even know the story. I'm not familiar with the Old Testament or even Abraham and the rest of it. Well, Abraham's hospitality to the angels. Another way of saying it's the soul-making poise referred to in some recent talks. It's the waiting in meditation for an image, making oneself available for the visitation of the angels, creating, opening, allowing and supporting a space, a psychic space that can be, maybe visited by the imaginal figures in which the imaginal figures can be created, discovered, born, can come. So another way of saying, well, I don't know the Old Testament, we're really talking about the soul-making poise, well, that start and that involves all kinds of factors when we talked about that, but humility, reverence, there before the image has even come, there is in relation to the potential of the image, in relation to, so to speak, the place or the where or the level from which the angels come, the images come, there is in relation to that the humility and a reverence, the elements and the imaginal are already there, the sensitivity of the energy body, the recognition that it's created, discovered, that it's a way of looking and therefore I have some work to do as much as it is grace, but it's definitely also a grace. All this is part and more is part of the soul-making poise. So this icon of Abraham's hospitality to the angels, and if you know some of that, some of theology of the Trinity itself is a kind of openness to each other, an economy, they talk about the Trinitarian economy, it's the poise in relationship to that, the soul-making poise, and we can have through the history of our soul-making practice, we can get more and more of a sense, more and more familiar with not the soul-making poise, because it's not, again, like everything else, it's not a narrowly rigidly defined thing, it has a range and it will be elastic and with soft edges, but we get a sense more and more of that space, we get familiar more and more with that, the range of that space, what it can be and what it involves, and then that soul-making poise itself can become sensed with soul, it too can become image. This is something I talked about, I think, even in the path of the imaginal, remember, just the very experience or occasion of sitting there in meditation open to the possibility of images coming, that too can become image. So in fact, any element of the whole constellation of the imaginal can become image, it may be that the reverence itself as part of the soul-making poise becomes imaginal, or the humility, or whatever it is. Another way, and I touched on this the other day, just throughout quite briefly, is the, or another kind of iconic moment here that may help you, help some people to find a way in to this third part of this example, is the preparation for the Sabbath, on the Friday of the Jewish Sabbath, the preparation for welcoming the Sabbath, and the Sabbath in its presence, its sort of visitation of the shvina, the female aspect of God, sometimes also called the Bride of God, the Bride of the Divine. And what the Sabbath is, is a kind of visitation into our lives, into this plane of existence of that level of the Divine, of that aspect, of that face of the Divine. And so what is that to humbly and reverentially, and with sensitivity and care, open up the space and create the space in one's house, in one's being, in the house of one's body, in the space that one's in, the physical space that one's in, and open that space for the imminent visitation, blessing, arrival of the Bride, the Bride of God, the Sabbath Bride, the Shvina. So that would be the third one, something like that, Abraham's hospitality, the angels, the preparation for welcoming the Sabbath, the soul making poise itself. Again, very hard to know what's prescribed there, or what it would look like, and it may be that not much movement or sound is involved at all, but it may be that there is a lot, you know, so you have to feel your way into these things. Okay, the last possibility I just want to offer for now, you can hear in the kind of thing that I'm talking about, that there are many possibilities here. But the last one for now is to take the example of Rosa Parks. Many of you know the story, obviously, and what happened, and significant part of, well, human history, actually, but also certainly civil rights history in the US, and racial justice history. So 1955 is in Alabama, Montgomery, Alabama, and there was at that time, basically, in effect, racist laws, all kinds of racist laws, but also on public transport, and a kind of apartheid placed there by law. And at the discretion, in this case, of the bus driver, they could ask, or demand, really, African Americans sitting on, so the bus was divided into two parts of a so-called Negro colored section, rather, and a white section. And there was this basic apartheid going on. And if the white-only section got filled, then the bus driver could extend the white-only section, and basically make the African Americans have to get up and stand so that the white people could sit down. And so Rosa Parks was already an activist by that point, and knew what she was about. She was coming home from work one day, and this is exactly what happened. The white-only section, she took her seat in the so-called colored section early on in the trip, and then after a few stops, the white-only section got filled, and then the bus driver told her to move, told her, and I think three or four others, to move. Three or four other African Americans moved, and they moved, and she did not move, and she refused. And that's the sort of iconic moment. So unlike the firing squad, the execution, the crucifixion, the marches in the lion's den, it's unclear exactly what the consequences are, what the next moments will bring, or what the long-term consequences are. What is clear is that it's dangerous. What she was doing was dangerous, and it would have negative and probably harmful consequences. It was clear that it therefore took courage. She knew this, and she also knew something is right about what I'm doing here, and something is wrong about what is being enforced by the law, by racist law. So she was actually fired from her job. She worked as a seamstress in a local store, in a department store, and she was fired because of this later. And in fact, she received death threats for years because as a result, as a consequence for this immovability. I want to tell you about this. So, yes, she says, I think it's in her autobiography, she said that when that white bus driver, he came back and he said that to us, and he waved his hand, ordered us up and ordered us out of our seats. She said, I felt a determination cover my body like a quilt on a winter night. So already in what she's talking about, there's body there. It's in the sense of her body. All these exercises we're talking about have to do with body and soul, and the connection between soul and body, and her connection with her knowledge of what was right, and her clarity in what was of value, what was virtue, what was right, what was wrong. That was very much connected with her bodily experience and the virtues of courage and all that. We've talked in other talks about how all that, we can see all that, understand all that whole arena of ethics and morality, values, virtues, etc. From the perspective of soul, it's intimately tied up with the concerns of soul. It's central to the concerns of soul, values, virtues, ethics. But I want to point out, in her very experience, was something very, her body was very, very central. What enabled her to do that, perhaps, was the integration of her bodily sense with the soul sense, integrated with the ethical sense. These three almost not separate. All through these exercises, these five exercises, this is part of what I'm wanting to almost like, knead together, knit together, grow into each other, body, soul, and soul sense, and voice. In terms of her voice, she was already active, she was already pretty, outspoken, etc. And she continued to be to the rest of her life. Another interesting thing she said was that in that moment, when she didn't move, she said, I just thought of Emmett Till and I just couldn't go back, I just couldn't go back, you know, where he was telling me to go. I couldn't go back to the so-called color section. Emmett Till, again, many people know, he should know, was a 14-year-old African-American boy, and something happened, but it's very unclear what, if anything, indeed happened. But he was accused of offending, put that word in inverted commas, or perhaps flirting with, or something like that, whether even that happened or not. He was accused of offending a white woman or a white girl in a grocery store or something one day. And he basically got lynched and murdered by four white men. And there was a trial, but those four white men were acquitted of his murder. So she said, when this, and that was quite, not that long before this happened with Rosa Parks, 1955, and she said, when that happened, that bus driver came back, I just thought of Emmett Till and I just couldn't move. Now, again, it's not for me to presuppose the workings of her mind and soul and heart there, but you recognize that she is also thinking of a figure, a dead figure, someone who has become very meaningful in her life because she was involved, to some extent, in the whole movement for justice there in relation to his trial. But she draws on an image, the image in the memory of Emmett Till. So that's just an interesting observation there. And again, what enabled this immovability that she had, and this conviction that she had, and this courage not to move, courage to break the law, courage to defy what she was being told to do. She also writes in her autobiography, she says, people say, you know, they always say, oh, I didn't give up my seat because I was just tired. She says, that's actually not true. Somehow the story got polluted a little bit or watered down a little bit. It wasn't just that she was tired. She says, I was not tired physically or no more tired than I usually was at the end of a working day. And I was not old, although some people have an image of me as being old then. I was 42, so not old at all. No, the only tired I was, was tired of giving in, tired of giving in to that racial injustice, that kind of apartheid. Actually, and then again, in terms of consequences, one of the beautiful consequences, and this is part of what we don't know, what we don't know in terms of when we really act in line with the duty of our soul and the callings of our soul. We can't always know the beauty and the fruit that comes out of that act. So one of the consequences was that the African American residents of Montgomery, Alabama, boycotted the public bus service and Rosa Parks' court cases were actually being slowed down. So they had to exercise tremendous tenacity after walking to work, not taking the buses, car sharing where they had cars, whatever, really staying steady. It would have been much easier to take the buses and they boycotted the buses, putting in direct financial pressure then on the bus company because they weren't getting that business. And the buses, just, those buses, just many buses, just stood there empty in the garage because they weren't being filled because the African American people who were boycotting the buses weren't filling the buses and paying for them. So eventually the city retracted, repealed the law requiring segregation on public buses. Of course there's a larger story there with the whole Civil Rights Movement and the US Supreme Court and all that. But this is the one, if we can, and these don't have to be exact, I'm just picking examples here to give you a sense of the kind of things that you might explore in these exercises. Apparently Rosa Parks, as a personality, was very sort of, she carried herself with a very dignified demeanor, naturally dignified. She was quite quiet, apparently, as a person, and serene, but dignified without in any way being pompous or putting on airs or anything like that. And that too, I think, is part of the flavor of this image that I want to communicate here. So her demeanor, her personality, was quiet and serene, dignified, but you can hear, I hope you can hear, you can get a sense of the soul power there and the soul conviction and how much her body is involved in that, the soul stretch and all of it. Now, okay, so here's a certain personality, a certain kind of style of expression. It's not to say, certainly it's not to imply that the only way to stand firm is in a quiet and serene way. I don't want to imply that at all, but if this is the kind of iconic moment we're drawing on and we're focusing on for this part of this exercise, then that's actually part of the image, that it is quiet and serene. So maybe you can get a sense of that, of what would it be to sense into that whole, the whole gestalt, the whole configuration of that whole moment, that whole image, that whole time, that icon, that iconic moment, and then see how that wants to be mirrored or refracted or expressed or manifest, or what we're in with the body gesture, movement gesture voice, or what wants to manifest or express in response to that or from that as a seed. Even say you can hear three slightly different directions there, right? One is kind of embodying it, seeing how it's, one is reflecting, one is more refracting, and one is just seeing what happens in my soul and from my soul, or included in my soul, even that's so better, included in my soul, including the aspects of my soul which are my movement, my body, my gesture, my voice, including those aspects of the soul, what wants to manifest? Either because it's refracting it, reflecting it, or thirdly just in response to it or from it. So again, these kinds of exercises may be, may feel kind of at one level very easy, but at another level, or maybe it's just, maybe it's open-ended and you can hear, hmm, it could be, there's quite a lot of subtlety here possible, and it could be, could be quite difficult. I don't know, you'll have to find your way in and play and see. So all these exercises are really, I'm offering them as seeds, you know, just seeds. It's not my intention at all that these exercises become kind of canonical or rigid. This is now what we do. This is our canon of exercises that we do in this soul-making tradition. These are the ones, and only these, and exactly these, and that's not my intention at all. I mean, there's many more possibilities. I don't know, we'll see how time is and opportunities are, but maybe we'll add to them or change things, etc. Maybe we'll see. So it's not that they, that's not my intention, they become canonical. There are many more possibilities. Some, as I've already mentioned, some of what I've offered, or the examples of certain directions and emphasises in what I've put out here in these exercises, some of those emphases and even the nature of the content of these examples are in response to different students that I've been working with, etc. A different sangha, a different set of students that would have come my way, a different situation, and probably, almost certainly, would have given rise to somewhat different content, different emphases. There are different needs there. And so there would have been either slightly or very different exercises. But the principles of sensitivity, of developing sensitivity with the energy body, with the emotional body, developing range, the principles of developing sensitivity and depth and range with sensing the soul, the principle of needing together, knitting together, weaving together, stitching together, to make really, to make one movement, to make one body and soul. So it's not like there is the soul and there is the body, but actually making the body just a part of the soul, not as something other. Just as the perception can be either at times a soulful perception, sensing the soul, or at other times not, or more or less so. So also the body, so also the movements, the gestures, the voice. It's not really like there are two things. Take away my sensing, take away my thinking, my imagining. Where is the soul then? Similar to taking away the movement, voice, gesture. These are aspects of soul. And it's like either the blood can get there or not. Actually, as always, a spectrum. How much can the blood flow? How much can the blood of the soul, the waters of the soul, fires of the soul, whatever analogy you want to use? How much can that reach those aspects of our being? How much does it reach? Or is it blocked? Are they integrated or are they divorced? So that's all these central principles of sensitivity, of range, energy, body, emotional, and sensing the soul, and this kneading together, knitting together, this integrating of body and soul, body, voice and soul. We talked about earlier, actually various reasons why, in relation to practice and one's life, and soul making in one's life, and soul expressing and manifesting in one's life and in one's duty, and all of that. So all those principles apply to these exercises that stand steady. And the details are said, it's not really my intention for them to become canonical, to become rigid necessarily. Much better, as always, to understand this structural listening. What's the real main point here? But be a little bit careful, because sometimes people think, oh yeah, I understand the main point, and then the habit of soul, or the habit of the psychology, is for instance, not to show up with that strong integration of thunderous energy. For example, in the first part of the exercise number three, Thunder Clap, or Thunder and Lightning, or whatever it's called. That's so much out of the habit of movement, gesture, voice. That yes, I did it a few times, I got it, I understood the principles of why we're doing this, and then somehow, just my prevailing habit reasserted itself. And then I'm back to choosing, ah, Rob said, the movements, it's not important, they don't want to get too rigid around the movements. And then I'm back to, perhaps, for instance, just like the born and lost by angels, or some opposite kind of movement, just very fluid and watery. And I keep gravitating towards that kind of movement. I've forgotten the principle, I might have understood it, why we're doing this, I might have understood it at one point, but I've forgotten it. And in not keeping the principle current, it has allowed the force of probably long standing habit. And as I said, usually the habits here going for, are, have been reiterated and strengthened over decades, decades, and something, some other possibilities have atrophied, some other avenues have been blocked for decades. So in the absence of really, really thinking, why am I doing this? Why am I doing this? Oh yeah, right. Because the principle, in the absence of reminding myself why, then the habit takes over, and the habit for the weaker movement, the kind of more flowy movement, or whatever it is, the softer movement, the pink, fluffy angels, etc. Perhaps. If I remind myself of the principle, this is what I said about structural listening and understanding things structurally, the principle tells me, if I understand the principle, then I'll say, oh yeah, it's about range. It's about, the principle is telling me it's about range of movement, gesture, voice, of having those avenues and pathways be fully open, fully available for the influx of soul, and the efflux of soul, and the manifestation of soul in life. And remember, that's the principle. And so I want range there. I want them all to be open. So if I just remember the principle, I won't, I won't, the, the range of what I'm doing will not shrink to just the ones that I'm used to do, used to doing, out of habit, or indoctrination, or the cultures I've moved in, or whatever it is, or, or personal history, or, you know, trauma, whatever it is. Okay, so this is so important. So, talking about some genre treatment, talking about the emptiness, in terms of emptiness practice, so much understanding the sort of meta principles, META, the larger structural principles, they will help us, they will guide us, they will inform us in terms of what practice to do, and how to do this or that practice. Because understand why. Everything's so much as dependent on understanding why, which has to do with the structural principles, the undergirding, the whole thing. So, this is what we want. We want the body and the soul integrated together. We want the possibility of soul to manifest, express, flow through and flow from all aspects of the being, including the body movement, the body sense, the gesturing, the voice, the language, all of it. We want that soul to be able to come through there, as soul wants to come through there. So that we can follow our telos, we can discharge our duty, we can carry that out, we can have a fuller sense of ourselves, sense ourselves as souls, sense our life we soul, our work, our duty, our relationships, our being, the aspects of our being. This is what we want. I think it was in the, I can't remember, I think it was in the Erosanfetid series, and I quoted a Sanskrit line from the Guryasamaja Tantra, it's actually a line that's quite common, almost a stock phrase, a stock sentence introducing some tantras. And in English it says, thus if I heard, on one occasion the Bhagavan, the Blessed One, was dwelling, Vijahara was dwelling, it says, in Sarva Tatagata Kaya Vakchita Guya Hridaya Vajra, actually it's a long compound. And so what you get there, okay where's the Blessed One dwelling on one occasion? And then you get this compound which is kind of like a jewel, multifaceted jewel, that because of the structure of the Sanskrit language can be, can yield so many different permutations of meaning. What does it exactly mean for the Bhagavan, the Blessed One, to be dwelling in that, whatever that is, this whole Sanskrit compound? Well it means multiple things, it means many things at different levels. And even each one of the way we might kind of carve up that compound, grammatically and syntactically, even that can mean many things at different levels. Sarva Tatagata means in Sanskrit all the Tatagatas, Tatagata some of you will know is an epithet that the Buddha used to refer to himself. He didn't call himself the Buddha, he came once in a while, but mostly he called himself the Tatagata. And Tatagata was a word that was I think, I'm pretty sure around before the Buddha's time, and he picked it up. And even he gave multiple possible interpretations of what that word Tatagata could mean, what the name, what a name he had given himself could mean. Once you came to the Mahayana there were even more interpretations, probably before him there were others. And there's a kind of proliferation of meanings as you get into the Mahayana and Vajrayana. Sarva Tatagata, all the Tatagatas, so the Blessed One was dwelling in something something of all the Tatagatas. Tatagata also is an interesting word because it means, it has itself also because of the structure of the Sanskrit language. And the way words are put together called Sandhi, it can mean many things. So it can mean the one who has gone to the truth, or gone to the, to suchness, gone to reality. And it can also mean the one who has come from the truth, come from reality. So it's got multiple meanings just in the word Tatagata, gone to reality, come from reality, come from the truth, the realm of truth, the realm of suchness. So the Blessed One was dwelling in the Kaya Vakchita, the body, speech and mind. Kaya Vakchita, Vakchita. What kind of body-speech mind? The body-speech mind of all the Tatagatas, but also qualified by some adjectives. And again this depends on how you carve out that Sanskrit compound. Guhy is a word that sometimes there in the Tantric text, sometimes I'll put it in right now, it doesn't really matter. It's optional. But two others are definitely are Hridaya and Vajra. Vajra is diamond and Hridaya is something like heart essence. And Guhy is secret. So the Blessed One, the Bhagawan was dwelling, the Jhra, in the diamond, which also means indestructible, eternal. He was dwelling in the indestructible, the diamond heart essence, or the diamond secret heart essence, or the diamond heart essence of the secret, you can carve it many ways, of the body, speech and mind of all Tatagatas, of all Buddhas, of all those who are gone to and come from the truth. So there's so many directions, meaning so many ways the light can reflect from and refract through this multifaceted jewel of this phrase, of this Sanskrit compound Sarvatatgata Kayebak, Chittaguyakritayavajja. Actually there's more even there, I'm just taking these phrases. Is it possible that we too, in our lives, in soul making, when we're sensing the soul, with that soul making poise, when the elements of the imaginal are ignited, when we are sensing the soul, that we too have opened up the body, the avenues of the body, of the voice, of movement, the gesture, the range, the possibility, the depth, the sensitivity, the beauty, so that they too, like a multifaceted jewel, have that range of directionality, all the attributes of Buddhahood, all that dharmakaya, the body of the attributes of the Buddha, of the transcendent Buddha, the primordial Buddha. Can we exercise and open up the channels of our being, the movements we make, the body, the sense of the body, the sense of the emotions, the gestures, the voice, so that at times at least we too are dwelling, the jahr, in the diamond, the indestructible, the eternal heart essence of the body, speech and mind of all Buddhas, all tatgatas, all those who go to and come from this transcendent truth, this transcendent reality, this reality that is both transcendent and imminent. So I want, if I can, to actually talk a bit more about Buddha nature and this kind of thing. I just want to tie it to what we've just done, that movement, gesture, voice, body and speech, as well as mind, sensing and thinking and cognition, which you've talked much more about in the balance of things, in the soul making dharmic. All of that can be open to, can reflect and refract the soul making of the dharmakya, the sensing of the soul of the dharmakya, the soul duty of the dharmakya, which is my soul duty, the one that soul wants to come through me. So have I opened up those channels? Have I exercised them? Have I pushed them out and stretched them from any kind of habitual collapse or block that might have accrued there, as I said, over years or decades for all kinds of reasons, so that more and more of my being, more and more of the aspects of my being are available, are open for soul to come through, to be soul and to make soul. So this is part of the why we're doing all this. Just to say one last thing for now, in regard to these exercises and this notion of preliminaries, and you know, I've said part of it before, which is that we can have a preliminary exercise or a sort of foundation exercise, and as we develop that, and as the soul making develops, the range, both in terms of sort of lateral scope, breadth and depth and dimensionality, and the sensitivity and the subtlety and all the rest of it, of that practice really starts to expand as we practice the exercises, as the soul making kicks in, in relation to those preliminary exercises and that feel, that arena or domain. What starts as a preliminary becomes in itself soul making and gets stretched in all kinds of ways. So I want to repeat that as well, here now. The second thing, and very related, is if you ask, say, Tibetan Rinpoche or someone with a lot of practice in the Tibetan tradition, or even regarded as a master, and you ask them, say, a Zogchen master or something like that, where there's so much emphasis on Zogchen or not doing, and the ultimate practice, and that kind of language, or some other traditions, etc. And you actually ask them, or they report what they spend most of their formal practice time doing, they still, even after many years, spend perhaps most of their time doing what are basically preliminary exercises. Gondru is the Tibetan, some of you will know. So yes, preliminary is that this needs to come first, this is what proceeds. But it doesn't necessarily mean that then, okay, now I've done that, and then I stop. First we do this, then I stop doing that, because I've done it, and I've accomplished what I want to accomplish, and I can just do my sort of more advanced practice. So there's that whole relationship with this notion of preliminary, that's very much the kind of dominant one, actually, in people who take their practice in Tibetan, but in very, very seriously, Rinpoche's and Master's, etc. And I'm not really sure about this word preliminary, I'm partly picking it and using it because there are preliminaries, as we've tried to explain, to certain areas, directions, domains of our being and our life opening up with soul. So in some ways, they are preliminaries, but they're also, as we've explained, they can be expanded, stretched, developed, they can become soul making themselves, they can become extraordinary and not basic at all. So there's a whole range, and I think that you will get that sense with all this. So, you know, how does one relate to this, all these practices over time, as one's developing one's soul making practices, as preliminaries and then soul making, maybe there's in parallel, these two, and going back and forth, and periods of one or the other, all that. So I don't know that that's necessarily universally formulaic. I have to see. But for right now, we can use the word preliminary with that caveat. For more information on this and more about this, visit darmaseed.org to learn more. And thanks.

 I'm not quite sure what will be possible today, but I would like to introduce the fourth exercise, which could be, as I'll explain when I get to it, could be seen as two exercises. I'd like to introduce that maybe, the fifth one. But before even introducing the fourth, I just thought spend a little time opening up and considering some of the words and the vocabulary we've been using by now, it's quite familiar to a lot of you who are familiar with soul-making dharma teachings. Some of these words and some of these terms, particularly as they inform and inflect and open up our sense of human being and our human person and personhood and what it is to be a person. So I just want to say a few things about that. A few weeks ago, not very long ago, two or three weeks ago, I was trying to remember the actual details and I can't remember exactly what it was that I was feeling really quite pressured about and, I'm going to say, thrown off, sent out, unbalanced, pressured, flattened. But there were a lot of things that seemed like they needed deciding at the time. Practical things, things in relation to preparing for death and my will and the future of the teachings and teacher training and all kinds of things. A lot of things that seemed to need figuring out and arranging before my death. And within that, there were, it seemed, lots of different people's requests and opinions and voices in there. And, yes, I can't remember exactly what it is, but it was to do with those kinds of things and particularly in relation to the teachings and the future of the teachings and teachers and things like that. But at some point I realized that I'm really not feeling okay with all this. It's all gotten a bit crazy. And the language that came to me, the language that would seem very natural at that point, to describe what was missing for myself at that point, and that language also very insightful. But it came very naturally. It was not the language of, I've lost my center, as I said a minute ago, whatever, or I'm unscented or I need to get centered, I need to regain my center or center myself or whatever. That wasn't the language that came. And I would understand, of course, those kinds of situations and that kind of feeling flustered and pulled in so many directions and so many decisions and all that. That would very easily be a way that someone, that we in our contemporary society might describe to ourselves what has happened and then what needs to happen. But the words that came, the description that came, organically, naturally, spontaneously, and that contain, of course, the insight, the seeds of insight for what I needed to do to redress the situation was that I've lost my connection with the angels. I lost my connection with the Daemon. And I need to somehow reconnect, find that connection again with the angel, with the Daemon, with the image. And that, as I said, the insight was there. In the description of the problem was the insight of the direction needed for a solution, where I needed to orient, what I needed to do, how I needed to look, how I needed to relate and think about things. And that was exactly what did indeed help. Finding again these connections with the angels in relation to all this, all that was difficult and sort of what was at the middle of the pith of the difficulty in relation to the teachings, basically, because it was all seen, most of it centered around the teachings and the future of the teachings and all that stuff. And so finding my connection again, finding again my connection with the angels in my relationship with them, in relation to the teachings, so all of that. And that's what got lost. And I was trying to figure out, solve, find answers to get through a lot of decisions and things that needed to be made. I all felt quite pressured, but I had lost that connection. I had gone into a much more one-dimensional mode of understanding that and relating to all that set of issues and decisions and problems and conundra. It was all one-dimensional. It was not that angel wasn't there. I wasn't in relationship with the angel with all of that. So when a person today uses language like, need to, lost my center, need to get centered or centered myself or find my center, regain my center, what does that word kind of tend to imply or what's wrapped up in that kind of notion, in that kind of vocabulary? And particularly what's wrapped up, what it tend to imply about the human being and about the self and about the person. What's the logos, the conceptual framework of human being, self, person, that is kind of implicitly tied in with a notion such as centering? So there's probably quite a few and it's not set in stone and it might vary, etc. But think about a few of them. For instance, interiority is one of them, generally, not necessarily, but generally. The center of gravity, my center of gravity, and therefore my sense of balance, my point of balance, is conceived then usually within, somehow within me. So here one's feeling perhaps pulled out, so to speak, in all these diverse distractions or pulls or demands or questions or whatever it is, needs. And the center of gravity, the still point, the balance point, is conceived of as within usually. So there's a kind of interiority there that goes, that's part of the conceptual framework of the human being that goes with words like centering and notions like centering, perhaps. Secondly, also, is perhaps a notion of circumscription of the human being, of the self, like where do I end? I end here, the world starts there, or you start there, whatever it is. So when we talk about a center, it's about a center of something, usually it's a center of a circle, a center of a geometrical structure, or whatever it is, a center of a limited space, a limited area, a center of a country, whatever. So there's a delimited space, a circumscribed space. Where I end, that's my boundary, if you like, that's my border. That notion also seems wrapped up kind of subtly, implicitly with a notion of centering. Now, I could still have a kind of circumscribed notion of where I end, that could still be involved when I use the language and idea of connection with the demon, connection with the angel. But what I meant, and what I mean by that, or what I would like to emphasize right now by that connection with the angels is, and re-finding that connection with the angels, is more a kind of expanded notion or sense of a human being. As we talked about, I think it was in the talk on death and dying in Saiki's orchard. Rather than, this area is me, we have a sense of the larger human being is both image and analog. There's a couple of parts to that. The first part is to do circumscription, the second part is to do singularity. But just to stay with circumscription. Image and analog, and I in my life, to the best of my ability, more or less at different times, the analog of that image, of that angel. And where then do I end? If I have this more expanded notion of self, I am actually this whole system, it's too technical word, but this whole kishtl, this whole constellation of image and analog, maybe images and analogs. And that's all me. Then where do I end in that? Where is my circumscription in that exactly? And anyway then, the image, because the elements of the imagination, the angel, the image, where does the image end? Because that's going to be unfathomable and have unfathomable beyonds, etc. Where do I draw the line then of self there? Of my human being? And so where then exactly is the center of it? If I can't draw the line of the edge of the circle or whatever, I don't know where to place the center. I cannot say the center is here or there. So that's another idea, interiority, circumscription, but also, as I mentioned, singularity. Sometimes, usually with this notion of centering, the sense of the singularity of self, I need to find my center. I, as a singular self, need to kind of have recourse to myself, find the resource of my, find my resource in myself, in my center. And the sense then is the self as singular. Now, a person in contemporary society, of course, could say, I feel terrible, I feel really pressured, I reach out to friends and colleagues or whatever it is, and reaching out horizontally to, socially, horizontally, to the horizontal sense of society and friends, etc. But one could also reach out more, more, plural, if you like, not so much just to the singular self, not only reaching out horizontally to the flatly conceived society of others, in which I exist, but rather conceiving of the self as a plurality. So there's just the fact of conceiving of the human being, conceiving of the human person, as I described and tried to really emphasize in that talk on death and dying. Conceiving of the human person actually, phenomenologically and when we have a deep sense both of ourselves and of another, and when another has a deep sense of ourselves, that the experience is not necessarily completely singular. And I don't mean it's fragmented in the way sometimes anatta gets taught, but I mean it's plural or some, rather not simply singular, in the way that we are both image and analog or images and analogues. Several angels perhaps, and servant to analog to that plurality even of angels. So quite different notions there, interiority, circumscription of borders and singularity, are not the sort of the default mode of sense of the human being, the human person. And they weren't in that case, and as I find more and more these days when things are difficult, when there's challenge, different ways, that the sense, and I mean that word in its double meaning, the sense, the actual perception and the idea of my human being or another human being is not so much, is more along the lines of this image and analog, of having angelic dimensions, which are refracted into the human life more or less at different times with a duty to that. There's a kind of doubleness there, if you like. So it's also not, of course, and we think about centering that word, centering, take a fourth aspect or fourth notion that might be wrapped up in it, or idea that might be wrapped up in centering is that one then encounters one's self, or one's true self, or one's core, if you like, or whatever, at the center. And, you know, sort of, maybe not Dharma 101, but pretty soon in the Dharma, you're going to encounter the idea and it's not just particular to Buddha Dharma. So when I look for the self, I can't find it, actually. So it's not, we're not talking in, one could think about centering as, I need to center because I need to encounter that self at my center. Or it could be that what I'm expecting at the center is a kind of infinite depth of still nothingness, of stillness and nothingness, which is a wonderful sense. One can look inside and just, there's different kinds of nothingness, different kinds of stillness. So that kind of infinite depth of stillness and nothingness is what one maybe encounters at the center. But in the Christian tradition, in the 20th century, there was a re-stimulation, a re-vivification of some of their contemplative practices in the Catholic tradition, centering prayer. Originally, I think it's changed now, but originally it meant just that. In the center is this still nothingness, beyond any image of God, beyond any word or directive, is just a kind of emptiness. And so this is tied up also with the via negativa, the apophatic tradition, looking deep inside myself, I encounter nothing and that nothingness is the same, the depth of that nothingness is the same as the depth of the nothingness of God. So this is wonderful and this is a real mystical resource, but still meaning something quite different if I wasn't gravitating towards that notion and that movement of centering and of needing centering. It's not that I'm expecting to encounter myself at the center, nor am I expecting, nor am I kind of hoping for an experience of still nothingness at the center, which may of course be very helpful at different times. But rather, you need to reconnect with the angels. And the angel, the image, is other and itself, it's both and neither. It's me and not me and it's not me and not not me. This angel, in the mystery of there being the mystery of this angelic constellation, this angelic relationship, this angel is both other and self, but it's the theophany, it's a face of the divine, it's an expression of the divine, which is different than an emptiness. An emptiness is not a theophany. An emptiness is taken more, taken usually, usually construed as an essence. And this is a transcendent, usually construed as a transcendent essence beyond all attributes. A theophany is a face, a presentation of, we could say, of attributes or is a being in itself a person in itself, you could say. So rather than encountering myself at the center, rather than encountering a deep well of still nothingness, wonderful as that might be, actually not at the center, but in relationship with a theophany. Not at the center of anything, but in relationship with. Where exactly is that in space? So, quite different notions. Now some of this will be to different degrees familiar, if you're familiar with soul making dharma. Some of the ways we use these words and some of, really, where I'm going to point to is where the words point to, the direction of possibility in which these words and these terms point, as opposed to they themselves define this or that. And this is the circumscription, this is the limit and definition, delimitation of these words. More to get a sense of this is the, this is the, the words are, are directions. And the directions of soul possibility, directions of soul experience and soul conception. And we linger on this word angel a little bit, which we used it quite a lot over the last years. But just to say a few more things, a few more things about it, you know, careful, for instance, of a limiting idea that the angel or an angel or an image kind of shows up out of the blue and will help you with something, will give you an idea or give you a creative impulse or whatever it is, a seed or something. It might, it might show up out of the blue and we talked about, again I can't remember when, but we talked about, I used the phrase, the poise of soul making or something like that, soul making poise. In other words, taking care of the stance, the poise of one's being, one's energy body, one's attention, one's receptivity, one's humility and all of that. And in that poise, in the soul making poise, it's sort of opening the space, priming and preparing the space. Thinking now parallels with the Jewish tradition of preparing for the Sabbath. And the Sabbath is the reception of the shkina, the reception of the Sabbath angel who visits, who comes on that evening, on that day. And the human being's job is partly to prepare, to make the space and the time beautiful, ready, prepared, holy, special, hospitable. So it may well be that we get, we, with an attitude of humility, we learn to take care with that soul making poise. And in that way we are in a kind of humbly waiting and primed, prepared space. Our being becomes that space, becomes a space of hospitality for the angels. And they may visit then, sort of out of the blue. And then with that there may be a gift. We may be helped with this or that in our lives, given something, given an idea, given creative seeds, whatever. But careful of that as an idea that might limit our sense of angels and what they are and how they arise and what our relationship with them is. Because it's often the case, and this is something I've shared before, it's often the case that one has already started something. Perhaps it's a creative project or a big piece of work, an idea. And perhaps it feels like a lot. It feels like a stretch or a challenge. And the angel comes then. Then, and the coming of the angel might be the actual, the work itself, or this project itself becoming imaginal. It becomes angelic. So it might be there's me and there's this project and there's this third character called the angel that's going to help me in my relationship with the project. But it might also be that the work itself, or the idea that's beginning to take shape, I'm grappling with it, kind of just stating or wanting to come through, whatever it is, or this big project that I need to do, whatever that might be, that it becomes angel. It becomes angelic. It becomes imaginal person with autonomy, with desire, its own heroes, its own desire, etc. So careful of, again, not delimiting too tightly what we mean by angel. We have to delimit it in some, we're not just open for any old ideas about angels and all that business. So I say the words, the concepts are pointing us in a direction, pointing us along a road. But that road is infinite. It has boundaries. It's not like anything can fall under the scope of that road. You can just call anything angel, which is, in some circles, fairly common. Just use that word too easily, whether it's used completely unspiritually just as a kind of term of endearment or in certain spiritual or new age circles or whatever. And we're not using it in those ways. So we're meaning, maybe that's a good analogy, we're pointing in a certain direction and we can just keep travelling in that direction. And the road changes. The road develops. The terrain around the road develops as you walk down that road. Another way of saying this is an angel is also, like everything, a dependent arising. So in what I was just talking about, someone said, here's the, we could say in the first instance, it's dependent on the poise of soul making. The visitation of the Shri Na and Shabbat is dependent on the reverence and humility and the eros of the soul and the love of the soul for the Shri Na and for the Divine. And expressing that by the way it takes care of creating the space for the Sabbath. In terms of body and house and setting and environment. So of course all this applies to so many ways to soul making and imagine work and ritual and all that. But it's dependent arising, an angel is dependent arising also in possibly another sense, which is something is already there. It's already stretching me and then that, then the angel visits in response to that stretch, in response to that task that I'm given, in response to that work that I have to do. And it might be that one possibility within that is that the work itself, the task itself becomes angel, it becomes imaginal and angelic. So I've touched on this before, actually quite a few times, this question of something, I don't get any images or I don't get images. And sometimes people are okay with that but sometimes it's like people get a little bit frustrated or why don't I get images? Or they might say, for a slightly different language, having heard other language being used, they might say, why don't the angels seem to come to me? Why don't they seem to come to other people? Or I hear this person and that person talk about angels coming or the angel coming or whatever, why don't they seem to come to me? Or it might be voiced as, excuse me, excuse me, it might be the angels, the gods, they don't seem to want anything from me. I hear this person and that person talk and I hear them talk about the demand of the angel, the demand of the imaginal, the duty or this or that. But they don't seem to come to me or they don't seem to want anything from me. So this whole constellation of ideas and perceptions and things that people might think, I've talked about quite a lot over the years, why don't I get image and what do we actually mean by image? What are the kind of, again, preparations, poises of soul, but also relationships with one's emotions and energy body and all kinds of other factors that support the generation, the arising creation, discovery of images, angels, etc. So there's lots of reasons which I've elaborated elsewhere, one I've touched on and just want to touch on again. And that actually has to do with desire and need to move to two aspects. Sometimes I say, why don't I get images? I don't know. Other reasons that I've elaborated elsewhere aside. So there may be actually for many people, this isn't a relevant reason. What I'm about to say, maybe there's just other things there, not relating the right way to their emotions or whatever it is. But sometimes it's like, actually, if you really, really deeply wanted images, they would come. You would have images. Images would visit you. They would arise. If you really deeply wanted them. So something, sometimes for some people, the issue is one of desire. And a person would say, why don't I get images? Or they seem to get more, this person seems to get more than I do or whatever. But it may be that actually it's not something we really deeply want. And so they don't necessarily arise. So maybe, as is sometimes for some people, that that actually is the relevant factor. And or, and maybe they're related, it might be that for some people at some time, again, this is not going to be relevant to some people, but or in some instances won't be relevant. But it may be, why don't the angels seem to come to me? Why don't the gods, the angels seem to want anything from me? It may be that you and I and the imaginal figures, the angels don't need each other. They actually don't need each other. They don't need me and I don't need them. They don't need you and you don't need them. Because there's nothing in the way a person is living and the choices that a person is making that needs the help or presence of the angels, of the imaginal figures. There's nothing really on the line, so to speak. There isn't really a soul stretch. We touched on this before, if you remember, I can't remember where. There isn't really, they're not living and choosing in their life in ways that really stretch their soul or that open them to kind of soul risks, if we might use that phrase. There's nothing really on the line. They might be stretched in all kinds of ways, might be very busy, might be stretched doing, you know, really something very helpful in the world, whatever. But it's not actually a soul stretch and there's no real risk there. And maybe it's that the angels, the imaginal figures, the Daemons don't need and won't choose someone who is not willing to stretch. Stretch themselves, stretch their life, stretch their soul. So this is also a factor to consider, as it won't be relevant in a lot of instances, but sometimes it is important to realize this is actually what's happening. This is a reason why something is not happening. It may also be that the, and again, this will be even in only perhaps some instances of the instances I've just talked about where that is the case, it may be that the kind of stretch needed to invite or call forth the angel, the angels, the kind of stretch to which they respond. Maybe it's, it needs to be one which involves or must involve a sense of antinomy. Remember that word from the ethics talks from S and the image of ethics. Antinom is deeply felt in the soul. Having to choose faced with that antinomy, the branches, the roads of their divergent pools and callings felt sharply, deeply, genuinely in the soul. One is almost crucified, pulled this way and that by two opposing values, by the love of and the duty of, duty to antinomical values. And it may be that that kind of stretch, that kind of difficulty is the kind of stretch that sometimes, or maybe I don't know, maybe in every case needed, that's part of what it means to be stretched. Maybe it's just, that's a certain kind of stretch, I'm not sure. So all these are things to, I think, ponder. And of course, you know, some people, like I said it, going back to something I said earlier, well, it might not actually, it might not bother me that much. That this sense of angels that I hear people talking about or images don't come to me. If it doesn't, okay, leave it. But if it actually does, then these are things that you might want to include in your kind of inquiry and self-questioning. And just briefly, I heard sort of, someone was saying something about soul-making dharma and basically, the upshot was, or one of the pieces was, well, I'm sure it's all really great, but I'm very much paraphrasing, but I don't really relate to the word soul. And this was from a person who had been practicing dharma a long, long time, actually a teacher, for a long, you know, decades and decades, which is, you know, probably quite a common reaction, I imagine. And not really relating to that word soul at all. Oftentimes, it's the making that people don't relate to. The word making, of course, if you understand the whole track of exploration of ways of looking at fabrication, fabrication is just another word for making. And how that deepens and how it opens out and the understanding it opens out, then the word making is almost a dispensable word in soul-making. But for a lot of people, it's very puzzling because you'd usually put a kind of, you'd usually think of the word soul or have a sense of soul, use that in a very rarefied way. It would be something that we make. It would be something that is, or we discover, or that just is a level of being or whatever. Anyway, this person, it was the word soul. And I thought about that and know them a little bit. And so, well, it's interesting. Do you really relate, you know, you've been involved in Buddhism for 30, 40 years, whatever it is. Do you really relate to the word aggregate, kunda, skandhayin, in the Sanskrit? Or put the question in the past tense, did you really relate to that word when you first heard it? Or the words emptiness or anatta, no-self, those kinds of words and concepts? Probably not. But what's happened, it might be sometimes with words like emptiness, you know, sort of pre-disposition that many Dharva folk have to that kind of intuition, if you like, of that insight and that whole direction and that whole teaching even before ones were even encountered the teaching. But the word like aggregate, it's hard to think that one would really relate to that immediately when one hears it. It might be, but probably not. What has probably happened instead is one has been trained and trained oneself to use words like aggregate as skillful and helpful concepts. And then perhaps even as ways of looking. One has been trained in the use of a word like aggregate or a concept like aggregate, trained to use them and think of them in skillful and helpful ways. And they're not ultimate truths. This is something I've said many times. You know, five aggregates is not at all an obvious way of kind of dividing up a human being. And it's hardly, I would suspect, a kind of a way of thinking about self that one would have arrived at by oneself if one wasn't actually handed this teaching. Five aggregates and this is what they are. It was handed to us by someone in a position of authority with the authority of 2500 years of Buddhist tradition. And then we trained ourselves in those words. So just the fact that one doesn't really relate to a word that one is not familiar with in itself means nothing much at all. Couldn't the word soul be similarly unfamiliar at first, but eventually with practice and understanding actually become like the word aggregate, very fruitful like the concept aggregate. And in fact, even be the word soul, the concept soul, be something that contributes and supports to the reduction of particular sorts of suffering just as the way aggregates does. That's what that's what that's the function of the word aggregate. It's not an ultimate truth. What the teachings of the aggregates do or are supposed to do or designed to do is just that. They're just a group of concepts in the service of reducing suffering. It's not an ultimate truth. And couldn't soul be just something similar, unfamiliar at first, but with training, with practice as understanding grows, becomes very fruitful as a term of vocabulary and a concept and fruitful in many ways, but in one particular way in reducing certain kinds of suffering. The word, for example, the word aggregate will not on its own authentically and finally reduce the suffering of soullessness, for example. Again, if we open up, what does that what does that first noble truth mean? What kinds of suffering are there? And therefore, what does the third noble truth mean? Ending suffering. We could say these days there is the suffering of soullessness in our society, in our culture. Suffering and part of that is suffering of meaninglessness. We could bag it all together as the suffering of soullessness. It's also to do with lack of beauty and aesthetics and lack of depth, lack of refusal of dimensionality, all kinds of things. But the word aggregate on its own will not finally, fully and authentically reduce the suffering of, reduce that kind of suffering of the suffering of soullessness. In fact, it might even support it. The suffering of soullessness may be worsened by the teachings on the aggregates if I'm not careful how I pick them up and if or when I put them down. So, I mean, we could choose other words as well, even words like, you know, words from our contemporary culture or from Buddhist culture like trauma. It's an idea and it's actually it's a whole conceptual framework. So nowadays when we speak psychologically and we draw on that word and we use that term, we're actually invoking and implying a whole conceptual framework of psychology there. I don't really relate to that. In other times, other cultures, other periods of history, it would have been a quite bizarre notion or even just the sort of broader notion of say, for instance, early or parenting experiences shape the psychology or a dominant factor in the shaping of later psychology. And there's a whole conceptual framework. Actually, there's many conceptual frameworks, many alternate conceptual frameworks which overlap that we're invoking when we even say words that point to that whole idea and that whole framework of ideas. It could be really, really helpful, but may not relate to it at first. Maybe very, very useful, these words borrowed from psychology and these psychological concepts and notions. Or even when we use the word brain, I mean, certainly in the Buddhist time they were aware there was an organ in the middle of the head that was, you know, they had their word for it. I've forgotten what the Pali is. You know, they had looked at corpses and dissected them or whatever. But the way we use the word brain now, or the way many people in our culture use the word brain now as synonymous with mind might not be, or definitely was not at all, how the Buddha meant the word brain or mind as being something that was necessarily primarily physical even, or not completely physical. So there's lots of words and concepts. At this time in history, in culture, or at this time in my evolution and my practice and my journey, I don't really relate to this word. So it's like, so what? It doesn't mean that it cannot then become, with training, a very useful, very fruitful, very freeing idea, word, term of vocabulary and concept. And I'll give you back to that word aggregates, you know, even if it's just picked up as a kind of notion without much skill in using it as a way of looking in terms of anatta, etc. As I would outline this, that direction of practice, the anatta practice. It still functions to fabricate less. As a term of vocabulary, it fabricates less suffering, it certainly fabricates less self-sense. It dissects and kind of undercuts self-construction, self-fabrication. Okay, so it might do that to at all different levels, let's say, depending on how much skill one has in actually practicing with that notion. But as a term, what it does is it moves in the direction, it stimulates the direction of less fabrication, of suffering and of self, of some sufferings and of some levels of self, let's say. But in so doing, just that, in its movement towards fabricating less self, at the same time, the other side of the coin is that therefore it doesn't honor and respect and keep in focus or keep in sense the person. The person as someone in relationship, in meaningful relationship. That gets lost. The minute we start emphasizing talk of the aggregates and a view of the aggregates, then we simultaneously lose sight of, lose sense of the richness and multidimensionality of personhood and the relationality of personhood. And again, I'm going back to that talk. Pretty sure it was the one on death and dying. So we're thinking, what could we use this word person to mean, perhaps, when we're talking about a human subject, a human being that's more than subject because they're in meaningful relationship. And so they're more than just self, they're more than just, they become person if we really want to honor and respect and keep in our sense, in our senses and keep making sense of the personhood of a person. So they're kind of divergent directions or modes, the notion of the aggregates or the notion of, let's say, soul. Later on in Vajrayana teachings, there's the possibility of seeing the aggregates, the five aggregates as divine, as holy. But even then, we actually lose the personhood of the person. It dimensionalizes in a different way. Each aggregate, depending on different tantras, each aggregate is associated with a different divinity, a different Buddha or Buddha's consort or dakini or whatever. So there's a wonderful kind of dimensionalizing and divination that can come through that, but it still misses the person. Beautiful range of practices there, it still misses the person. So the term aggregates and the term soul almost do mutually exclusive, instigate mutually exclusive, opposite movements. So talk about soul, talk about angels, talk about all this, but in dyadic practice, in soul making practice, and even in some of these exercises, all this that we're pointing to now when we talk about these different words and all the different shades and meanings and scopes and dimensions of what these words mean and what they point away from and where they point towards and what they open up, all this kind of emerges naturally, I would say, through the process of sensing with soul. You probably experience it if you've done dyadic practice and at certain points of, who am I in relationship to here? Who is this other or triad or who are these others? And sometimes when we've been leading that on a retreat, you'll hear on the recording, sometimes we stimulate a shift in the sense towards sensing with soul, towards sensing the other as angel, others as angels. And just by asking the question, when there is soulfulness, when there's soulfulness in the field and then asking that question, who are these others? Who is this now that I'm beholding? Just asking the question in a field of soulfulness can stimulate a further opening of the sensing with soul. We begin to perceive other as angel. Other times we might deliberately suggest, can you see them now as angels? Or did we just start speaking of these others as angels? Or a person makes that deliberate shift in their sensing and like deliberately calling up an image, deliberately deciding to sense, see other as angel. But all these words, angel, soul, image, they imply an unfathomability. They also imply, going back to something I said earlier today, that a kind of neither a simple singularity nor a simple doubleness. So this, if I'm seeing this person as angel, I'm seeing them as neither simply single nor double. They are mutual, Tom, Dick or Harry, and Tom, Dick or Harry's angel or whatever. There's a mystery in the kind of impossibility of finally dividing them up as one or two, this being that I'm encountering, this being I'm sensing the soul. So all these words when we use words like angel or soul or my soul or any time we talk about image, there's that unfathomability there. And there's this neither one nor two really simply, as well as implied in the words angel, soul, image, etc. The dimensionality, the divinity, the infinite echoing and mirroring. So that's, you know, infinite echoing and mirroring is of the angel into this person's life. And this person's life and this person's being as the infinite echoing mirroring of the angel and the angel also a mirror and an echo of the being in a kind of two way back and forth echoing and mirroring each other. The whole, the mystery of that kind of sense and notion is also wrapped up in the sense of angel and soul as of course is also the imaginal middle way, neither real nor not real, the theater like quality. So when we use these words, angel, soul, just like image, all this is wrapped up there. And also eternality. So the angelic dimension is the timeless dimension. Perceive this person as angel, perceive an angel without a, you know, just an image or the angel that I'm in relationship to or the soul etc. Implied as eternality. So the angel, as we said again, I think in that talk on death and dying, I think it was that one, angels not of space or time. The being of the angel, the dimension of the being of the angel is not of space. It's not located inside me or next to me or behind me or wherever, above me, below me. But nor is it located in time. It's refracted. This angel, each of you there, refracted into space and time. And there's a sense to participation. The angel is something we talk again, go back to examples. We need to reconnect with the angels. Also a sense of re-participating in something. Or reconnecting with my sense of participating in something in the mystery of that word. So when we use these words, all these other notions are kind of woven in to the meaning of these words. They become very rich words. Soul, angel, just like image. And again, similar to the analogy I said about these words are like roads. They point in a certain direction. That road goes on forever. And it's another way of saying all these words and concepts and perceptions, especially like soul and angel, they have soft and elastic edges. Actually all those words like participation and divinity and eternality, all of them, soft and elastic edges. And they will stretch. So our notion of what we're talking about when we say soul and angel, that will stretch over time. It will deepen. It will be deepened. It will be complexified. It will be variegated. As the sensing of soul is encouraged, the soul making goes on as the soul making dynamic is allowed to do what it wants to do. Soft and elastic edges, they will stretch. They will deepen, complexify and variegate. Okay, so let's introduce, let's call it the fourth exercise. We might consider it two exercises, excuse me, the fourth and the fifth or set of exercises. I don't know. This one is in fact a dyad exercise. All these two are dyad exercises. And so I'll try and describe. The first, if we take it as two exercises, the first one, the first part if you say, two exercises, two parts, one exercise and two parts, the first part in a dyad and setting it up, whatever it needs to set that up in terms of the terminology, in terms of the space, in terms of the presence. And in the first part really, one person in the dyad blesses the other and the other person receives the other's blessing. So one is blessing and one is receiving. Now we've done quite a bit of this in different ways in the past, but just want to add a few more pieces in there, a few more variations as well. So some of it will be familiar and some will be maybe less so. So one person is their turn. They bless the other and they bless them through movement, gesture and voice. So, but what you cannot do as the blesser is you cannot use any known language, any language known to human beings. So you can utter sounds, you can use your voice, but not any known language. Somehow you're conveying blessing and emanating blessing, expressing and manifesting blessing. So one thing here is what does that mean, that word blessing? And again, back to what we just said about these words, soft and elastic edges and it will grow and it will deepen. The meaning of the word blessing may already be very wide, or it may not start, I'm not really sure what it means exactly, but it is potentially wide, deep and multidimensional and open and elastic, soft and elastic. So that we, as we practice more sensing the soul and especially in relation to blessing and being blessed, we can hopefully create and discover more and more of what blessing might mean. So it might start, for instance, it might start as just meta, I'm not really sure about that word blessing, but I know what meta means. And I'm familiar with that. So it might just start as that, okay, let it start as that. Maybe it includes praise, what they call doxology is the fancy word. Words of praise, doxology, or in this case movements, gestures and vocalizations of praise. So maybe that's a slight expansion from just the notion of meta. Start expanding, maybe it includes that, maybe it includes also gratitude, that in one's praise there's gratitude wrapped up in it. Remember, again, I can't remember what talk it was from, but that word eucharist actually means thankfulness or gratitude, I think, in Greek. But maybe that as we, as we either within this exercise or as we repeat the exercise or as we generally just do more soul making practice and our sense of soulfulness grows and the range of experience and ideation grows, it may be that this whole notion grows of what it means to bless and what it means to be blessed. And in the exercise it might be that as we're doing the exercise and the sense of the self, the sense of the other and the sense of the world, the environment, maybe even time or whatever, all that can become image. Maybe if I'm trying to, you know, use my voice without language and trying to say, trying to bless but without language, and it might be that the sounds, the words, not even words, but the sounds uttered and heard become image. They become imaginal. And who is blessing? And who is blessed? All this becomes image and in so doing it becomes imaginal image, its meaning expands and deepens. It may be that there's, well, we can come back to that. So just in terms of the exercise then, maybe you're in a diet, you're facing each other, one person takes the first turn to be the blesser, the job of the other is the one who is blessed. And their job, their task is twofold. It really has to do with just silent sensitivity and receptivity. And they want to notice they're looking at and listening to and opening their whole energy body, we've done all this kind of thing before, to open the whole energy body and all the senses open to the other and their blessing and their movement and voice and gesture, open to the sound and visuals and all the sense of the whole energy body in relationship with, sensing with the whole energy body. But then sensitive to one's own experiences, one's own experiences as the one who is blessed and one's own experiences of the energy body. And that includes whatever emotions, whatever soul resonances, etc. are arise and pass within that. But for the one who is blessed, it's a task in sensitivity, opening the energy body and the senses to that really full relationship with the one who is blessing. And then tracking, noticing what happens in primarily the energy body and the emotions as this person blesses you. So one wants to establish that, a really good energy body and emotional sensitivity and awareness. And then on top of that, when that's ready, probably that needs to be there before one then opens it up to including any sensing with soul or soul sense of the whole relational field there, the whole experience of being blessed, the other, the self, the moment, all of it. But practically speaking, or at least from all, from the outside, so to speak, one is just silent and still and open and the task is one of sensitivity, energy body and the emotion and then in the soul sense. So one's not responding. And then maybe after 10 minutes, well, you can time it yourself 10 minutes might feel like a lot. So it'll probably be it may be that this is really quite difficult. Some people find it's really quite difficult. They're a bit baffled or stumped what to do, how to how to do this at all. But hopefully it could also be fun. So a few variations of thrones, but. Let's say after about 10 minutes, you can reverse roles and maybe you need some silent meditation or something between perhaps to gather and maybe not. You have to see 10 minutes as it may feel very long or it may be that it may feel very difficult and awkward and one isn't quite sure what what what to do and what to what sounds to make, etc. Or it may be that actually it needs it needs 10 minutes or needs a longer to get going to get into a kind of groove because it because it's unfamiliar. So it may for some people it may not not be at all. But either way, even if it's difficult, hopefully it can be fun as well as lots to discover there as an exercise. So if you're in the blessing role, then you can improvise your utterances, improvise what comes through your mouth, take your time. It may be very fast. There's a very fast flow or very slow flow. It may be there's pauses in between utterances or movements or gestures or that it's just continuous streams or maybe continuous stream, then a pause or whatever. It may be loud or soft. You know, see if you can let your sense of any any soulfulness that's there, any sense of soul making, let that sense guide you just as we use that as a guiding in imaginal practice, etc. And again, the so you want to be feeling sensing the energy body, the resonances in the soul and the energy body you want to be putting, excuse me, as your blessing your whole energy body in relationship with the other. It may be that you deliberately bring in or play with the deliberate introduction of an image of yourself, that you inhabit a certain image, perhaps that you're familiar with or certainly that's arising at the time, or an image of the other, a sensing the soul of the other, or of the space you're in, or as I said of the movements and gestures and utterances themselves, that they, you bring in deliberate images, a deliberate imaginal sense of what they are. It may be that there's an image that you bring in that's a third, so that this imaginal figure is somehow coming or, if you like, in touch with you and through you, they are blessing the other. But it's really coming from this. So there's all kinds of possibilities here. So for some people this is going to be really quite strange and may take a little getting used to, may feel a little awkward, others will just, maybe not at all, and it's just easeful and delightful and fun. Then a few variations. So one is, the only rule is no words. You can make any movement or any gesture or any vocalisation. So any movement, gesture or vocalisation is okay, but not words. I said no language. A second possibility is no words and also no vocalisations. So you can only use movement and gesture. No voice. Still, how you bless just through movement and gesture. What wants to come? What feels soulful there? Can I sense that? Be in a relationship and follow that thread. And a third possibility is no words but no movements or gestures either. Only vocalisations. So you've got movements, gestures, vocalisations all okay. Then you've got only movement and gestures okay. And then you've got only vocalisations okay. So three variations. Sometimes it might occur to you to sing a melody if you're allowed to vocalise. And so that's fine. Maybe that's part of, you know, you hum or sing something that's part of the blessing. If you do do that, make sure that sometimes you try it without singing a melody, without singing anything. Just to, again, we're interested in really opening up ranges here. Okay now, either the second part or a separate exercise, we could conceive of them either way. Like you could separate this exercise number four into two separate exercises and do them at different times. Or you can kind of just segue one part into the next. But the second part, the second exercise would be then the same thing but dropping any idea of an attempt to express or convey some meaning. In other words, something that one could say in words. So even blessing, maybe something that one could, aspects of it could translate into words. But just, maybe it's just a second part, you're taking it to another level really. Dropping any idea of an attempt to express or convey any meaning. Something that could get put into words. Or an emotion. You're not conveying or expressing an emotion. Or an image. Or an event. Or a story. Or my story. Or your story. Whatever it is. There's just movement, gesture and voice. And dropping any sense of an attempt to express something with that. To convey something that means anything with that. So remember, we have the word, the element of the imagination of meaningfulness. And this is also not reduced to a single meaning. So what happens then if we recognize soul is more than this or that meaning? Even if the meanings are important, even if the meanings are important to soul, soul is more than that meaning. Than any meaning. And soul is also more than heart. So what happens now? Perhaps then also the notion of blessing may get kind of altered or dropped. Does that make sense as an exercise? Let's see if there's anything else I want to say about that. What happens in that second part? Maybe we've gone beyond blessing in the usual sense. Because it's an interesting word blessing. And I think it sort of occupies an area that's kind of at the edge of what could be put into other words. But in a way in the second part of this exercise we're just encouraging what we're doing through movement and gesture and voice to extend beyond the notion of blessing in the usual sense. Because we're trying to drop any attempt at expressing or conveying any meaning or anything that could be put into words. I think that's it. So hopefully that's clear for that exercise. And I think we'll stop for today there. And add the fifth exercise at a different time. Hopefully that's enough to be going with and that makes sense and you can play with that. And as I said it might feel very awkward. It might feel very very strange for some people. And maybe not at all for others. Everything in between. It might feel difficult. It might feel very self-conscious. All kinds of things. But it might also be fun. But wherever it starts it can grow. And it might start even if it feels all very nice. And maybe you're used to it from different retreats that we've done to some extent. But then even from where it is there it can grow and deepen and complex and become a lot more subtle as well. And involve a lot more sensitivity. So both on the part of the one who blesses and on the part of the one who's blessed. And as I say maybe in the second part of the second part of the second part of the second part we're even talking about something that's beyond the notion of blessing in the way that we usually use that word anyway. So there is just an exercise or there is just a dyad using movement gesture voice with the purpose of the intention towards deepening sensitivity, extending range and being receptive to soul. Receptive to soul and a vehicle for soul. A vehicle of soul. And all that sensitivity and that opening up of where we can sense soul and how soul can express through us. And what we can recognize as soul. All that becomes the main point and that has an extraordinary range of subtlety that's possible there. And sensitivity and growth and dimensionality. So that's really the big part. Range and depth. Sensitivity and including subtlety. Of course it doesn't have to be subtle only but it can move into that territory more and more. So that's what this is for. That's the purpose of this. That's the invitation. Please consider supporting DharmaSeed with a year-end gift. Your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all. Visit DharmaSeed.org-slash-donate to learn more. And thanks.

 I'd like to continue and explain the third exercise, or set of exercises really, set of exercises, exercise manual, how we're conceiving of them. But I also want to say a few more general things and start with the general things and take our time and not rush, and then introduce the third one and say a little bit more about the why of all this. So these movement, gesture and voice exercises, these instructions, this material is in addition to be added to what is already there in previous talks that we've recorded over the last years. And I tried to give a little list, but I know there are some I'm forgetting. In fact, I remember sitting right here, not on a retreat, recording something, offering some instructions or some possibility for meditation around and solving the voice. But I cannot for the life of me recollect where that is. So there may be other material as well. But anyway, it's all to be taken together, put together as a body of material, a kind of strand within the soul-making dharma, within the practices. Some of what we're saying, this set of talks, we'll repeat some of what's there, and some stuff will be there that's not here. In other words, I said other stuff there that I'm not going to repeat here, and vice-versa, there'll be new stuff here that wasn't said there. I'm just curious, actually. I wonder, I am wondering how many people who have listened to or even took part in those exercises, I can't remember which retreat it was, it might have been foundations of soul-making, I can't remember, but the talks are up on dharma seed called, Voice, Movement, and the Possibilities of Soul, I think. I think that's two parts. I wonder how many people, of everyone who's perhaps listened to those talks, how many actually picked up those exercises and practiced them, repeated them in practice? Or how many even listened and practiced, as opposed to just listened, but really how many actually picked those exercises up and pursued it and developed it as a practice? So I'm actually genuinely curious about that. I'm also genuinely curious that if not, in other words, if you perhaps heard those talks or had a little go with it and then you didn't pursue it, why not? And so I'm genuinely curious about that and I'm going to suggest that it would be good for all of us to be genuinely curious if that's the case. Why not? I think that's probably an interesting question and I really mean it as a question, not as a, you know, someone says, why not? Why didn't you do that? And it just becomes a self-judgment thing. Oh yes, it's another thing I failed at or didn't do well or whatever and neglected or whatever it is. But actually it's an interesting question. If I didn't, if you didn't, why not? It's an interesting question insofar as it might shed light on those areas and issues we touched on yesterday. Inertia. Like how much of not taking up those practices and not kind of galvanizing oneself to do what's unfamiliar. See what does take a bit of energy and a bit of oomph and a bit of, now I really have to do this and it's different than sitting there quietly with the legs crossed in the usual meditation posture or on the chair or whatever it is and doing my usual practice. So it's an interesting question. If one didn't, the why not becomes an interesting question insofar as it might illuminate those areas and issues we talked about. And also the question of discriminating significance or failing to discriminate discern significance. And these two things we talked about yesterday. Maybe I didn't because of inertias of different kinds in my practice, in my relationship with practice, what and how I practice and all that and the form of practice and how that can get kind of just rigidified, kind of set. In practice it's something you don't move much in or it doesn't make much noise. It's not allowed like that. It's certainly not, they were quite wild but sort of rambunctious, you know, some of what was there. And so was it inertia partly or was it, and this just didn't, I just didn't discern it, didn't occur to me as something, I didn't grasp it as something significant. There were, as I mentioned yesterday, lots of other reasons why not to do with how I put the teaching out and not taking enough time and rushing through things and etc. But insofar as it sheds light on those two areas, I mean also pedagogically I think it's interesting as we go forward, you know, to take more time and really earmark something, okay, this is a thing now, this is a practice and here we put a ring fence around it and make it a thing and make people do it. So pedagogically it's also an interesting question and something to bear in mind. But as far as it sheds light, as I said, on the issues, the areas of inertia and the capacity to discern the significance of something that we read or hear, it becomes a very interesting question. Why didn't I pick that up and pursue it and develop it and repeat it and practice it? So I'll leave that with you. We introduced yesterday these two first exercises, just called an exercise one and two, and just to repeat a little bit, again a little too brief, why, some of the why for those two exercises has to do with, well, firstly, developing sensitivity, again how much sensitivity and the development of sensitivities is part of so much an integral part of a necessary part of soul-making yoga practices. I so depend on sensitivity, sensitivity in this case to movement, to gesture, to voice, sensitivity to energy, body sensitivity to space, to sound. So all that was in exercises one and two, this possibility of developing sensitivity and how important that is in soul-making daily practice, increasing the scope or the area in which we are sensitive and to which we are sensitive and the range of aspects of being and expression to which we are sensitive and increasing sensitivity as well. And a second reason why has to do with, is it possible, I think it is, very possible that we can live as human beings in this culture of ours, this complex culture of ours, a complex sense of self, complex social dynamics, etc., complex psychology and our energy and our voice can be held in, our body can be held in, held back habitually, often unconsciously and often not even through a conscious choice. We are holding ourselves back, holding ourselves in as a habitual holding and that holding back of our energy and our voice, holding back of our bodily expression as well is actually holding back of our libido, of our life energy, of our life force and also of our heroes, in the larger and fuller, richer sense of that word, heroes, and holding back of our soul. And this I think is very, very common in our culture and it may be common, I'm going to say more about this as we go on, it may be especially common in certain ways in some Dharma cultures. So there's the development, why exercise is one and two, the development of sensitivity in certain areas and just the increase of sensitivity both in, I would say, refinement and depth but also in scope and also this question is, this question of is there a habitual holding back or holding in of my energy, of my voice, through my body which is actually holding back of my libido and my soul. Do I have a choice in that? Am I even conscious of that? It's very important, I think very, very important, we'll elaborate on this, I'll elaborate as we go forward. We talked about, you know, we use this language of preliminaries and exercises and just says it's probably obvious but if we call those exercises and the other exercises we'll give today and hopefully in the coming days, if we call them preliminaries, they're also all already presupposing other preliminaries, for example, mindfulness, some degree of energy body awareness. So they're also preliminaries that are resting on other preliminaries, you could say. So that's, excuse me, probably obvious. But also just a little bit, if you've been listening to the teachings over the last while, even just over the last couple of years, let's say, you can see that some of what we might call preliminaries and what we might ask for as preliminaries from a practitioner as prerequisites can then become insold. This is another thing we talk about, difference in foundation and root and a root as being something that can actually grow. Foundation is something that's fixed. So this, what is a kind of prerequisite or preliminary can then become an insold area and grow and be developed to other levels that we had never, never even anticipated or intuited or dreamt of. So this is very clear, for example, if we take two areas that we can consider as preliminaries, the energy body, and we've seen, okay, energy body is this kind of thing, awareness, but this kind of awareness, this kind of sense of the body, okay, people get a hang of that. But after a while, then we talked about the energy, the imaginal energy body, that that very sense of the energy body can become imaginal and can be related to as imaginal image. So it's not just a sort of kind of basic instrument. It becomes itself an erotic imaginal object. It becomes insold, it becomes alive in soul, its depth, the range of its possibility, what it can be, how it can manifest, how we can feel it, the whole relationship with it becomes erotic and imaginal. The whole thing just kind of balloons out exponentially to include other possibilities. So that would be one example of a preliminary or prerequisite that then becomes insold and then just completely opens out in the kind of, actually infinitely to other possibilities. A second example would be seelah, ethics. Again, we rest our teaching as Dharma teachings, a set of Dharma teachings within the Dharma teachings of seelah, of ethics. In our case, the five precepts that we receive from the Theravra and Buddhist tradition, taking this very seriously as a basis. And as practice develops, and I've outlined in two sets of talks now, seelah and soul and the image of ethics, as practice develops and the soul-making dynamics starts involving ethics, in the sense it starts, ethics itself becomes, values and virtues become erotic imaginal objects and the whole domain of seelah becomes erotically alive and alive to the soul and for the soul. Then that whole preliminary basis of the five precepts, again, just balloons out in complexity and depth and dimensionality and range and demand and beauty. All of that. So those would be two examples of areas where preliminary becomes its soul and then it becomes something that's potentially the opposite of preliminary, super advanced. But the same could be said of something like dhna or even mindfulness, but lots of possibilities there in relation to this idea of preliminaries. And again, to touch on this thread, I'll keep coming back to this, the why of all this. I'm going to repeat something I think I said yesterday. So why preliminaries? Why these exercises, these kinds of exercises? Why even think in terms of exercises or preliminaries? So as I said, we can just hope that the soul-making dynamic, we know, we've heard or we've had experience of the soul-making dynamic, what it does is it will expand things. It will expand its range. It will include more and more and it will expand something that it's kind of got in its vortex, in its dynamics, some area or aspect of our being, our life. It expands that area. We expand with it. Our understanding and our experience of that area or aspect of being expands with it or shatters in the breaking of the vessels. And it has to be built in a larger way, deeper, more fuller, far-reaching way. So it might be that we can just hope that the soul-making, that if we're practicing soul-making, we like it, practicing. And we can just hope that the soul-making dynamic will expand, will get hold in its expansion or in the breaking of vessels that happens occasionally from time to time. Sometimes it's just a stretch, sometimes actually a shattering. In that whole process, over time, that eventually it will just, you know, by itself come to involve and include an in-soul movement gesture voice. We can just hope that. That's because that's what soul-making dynamic does. If those areas, movement gesture and voice or some, let's say, some directions and possibilities within movement gesture and voice are, if the blocks there that we have are really entrenched, if they're entrenched enough, then the power of expansion of the soul-making dynamic propelled by Eros, etc., and the Eros-psychologous dynamic, if the blocks are more entrenched and effectively more powerful than the soul-making dynamic at that point, it won't, it won't in-soul those areas or those possibilities within those areas. So sometimes it does. The Eros and the soul-making, that just does its thing and it overcomes or it stretches those walls, those blocks. We've talked about this, whether they're blocks of Eros or psyche or logos or whatever it is. And sometimes it will come up against them and it won't be strong enough. The blocks are too entrenched. And so those areas will not be included in the soul-making dynamic. They won't be in-soul. Certain things won't open up as possibilities. It will stop there. The walls are not moving. The limitations stay where they are. Now, I don't know. And we know in advance, with respect to any aspect of our being or area of our life, whether whatever blocks we have there, which are often unconscious anyway, whether they will be weaker or stronger than the soul-making, the push of the soul-making dynamic, the fermentation, the force of fermentation of the soul-making dynamic as it moves into those areas, as it reaches those areas and those aspects of our being and our life. I don't know. How would we know that in advance? It may, of course, it may well be in some many cases that it does. Expand those limits. Push open those walls. Create, discover, open new possibilities, new roads for soul and new territories and landscapes. But there will be blocks and walls and limits that soul in its dynamic, in its process, which it encounters that it does not overcome. It stops there. And those areas remain out of reach, not open. No entry. The road there is not open. What does it mean for, for example, for movement, gesture, voice to be insold? Use this term. What does it mean? What do we mean, at least, when we say that movement, gesture, voice can become insold? Well, I think for right now it means two main things at least. It means at least these two things, and they're both quite big. So the first is, it means that if the soul wants to express and communicate through or using these aspects of our being, movement, gesture, voice, it can. They are available within those domains of movement, gesture, voice, there are roads that are open, travel is possible, expansion is possible. If it means that to be insold, movement, gesture, voice, to be insold means that if that soul wants to express or communicate using or through those aspects of our being, it can. Because they are there, they're available and they're open. And the degree of possible development there is infinite. Again, if we go back to the sort of example, the analogy of music, it's just completely open-ended how to what degree that those arts can be developed. We talk about the art of movement, say dance or a gesture or a voice, and how the art of the soul using those media, movement, gesture, voice as expression. There's no limit to the depth and height of the art that is possible there, the arts that are possible there. It's just staggering what some people are able to do. And not just in terms of technique, etc., but then if you think about in terms of the depth and the height of soul and the breadth of soul that can be coupled with that technique to bring that sort of really deep soul power that comes through in really great art. So certainly that, but also probably for most of us, what we're really talking about is it's available just as part of the soul manifesting, some of the ways the soul manifests and wants to manifest in everyday life, in living our life soulfully or doing our soul duties, so to speak. So if it wants to express and communicate through and using those aspects of being, if soul wants that, it can. And that may mean developing a really, you know, the art of movement, gesture, voice to some degree, maybe even to an extraordinary degree. But probably for most of us it means just it can in life, in the ordinary manifesting of soul in life. That's not something that bars those directions and domains from being in soul, from soul, but bar soul from flowing through and expressing and communicating in and through and with those aspects of our being. So that's one thing that it means, from movement, gesture, voice to being soul. A second thing that it means is that the movement, gesture and voice of oneself or of another, in their everyday ordinary usages, just the voice speaking or just having a conversation or exclaiming something or the hand moving as it speaks or whatever it is, those ordinary usages of movement, gesture or voice can be sensed with soul, can be sensed therefore as angelic, as refracting the angel, the demon. They are sensed as dimensional, unfathomable, as divine in origin, as echoing the eternal. So for movement, gesture, voice to being soul, it means these two main things. And I think they're both really, really important if we talk about opening our lives to soul making or our lives being open to soul. And then I shared about my, what I call my grief in relation to, particularly in that one sort of area around jazz guitar, improvising jazz guitar in particular, the technique really, my grief. A better word might be regret. I mean, there's definitely grief there, but there's also kind of regret. I think, you know, people might ask, oh, you know, you're going to die soon and is there anything you regret? Well, that's what I said. Well, there's one thing, there's just one thing and it's that. Why the word regret? Because, you know, even though I did go to music school and all that and conservatory blah, blah, blah, it's like I, you actually end up having to figure out a lot of stuff on your own, especially if you're doing jazz, you have to find your own ways to do things and your own avenues that you're interested in and develop them. So there was plenty of things even within jazz that I figured out on my own, so to speak, on my own. You know, you're never on your own completely with anything, but certainly picking up different pieces here and there, following my intuition, following my eros, essentially, and playing, experimenting, creating, discovering, plenty of things I figured out on my own. And looking back, of course, I could have chosen technique in the sense that I was talking about it the other day, this particular kind of areas of technique. I could have chosen that as something to focus on, say, okay, let me just really try and get, figure this out and get really interested in it. But actually, I effectively chose other areas instead, other areas of music, other areas of guitar playing, in fact, as well. And I developed them. And that was wonderful and very fruitful and beautiful, but I could have chosen technique. So it's actually a kind of regret. I have a, yes, I wasn't taught it because, as I said, there wasn't the pedagogy there at that time. But I could have just kept bashing away until, you know, in this kind of dogged way that one has if one really wants something. But I didn't. I chose other things instead. So there's regret. There's some responsibility that falls on me. So in a way, offering these particular teachings to just, these teachings now, offering them so that there's the possibility that you can practice, practice so in a way that you don't end up regretting, that you don't end up regretting not supporting yourself fully or allowing yourself or enabling yourself fully to move in the direction or be moved in the direction of what you want with respect to soul making dharma. And also what you want with respect to soul in life, you know, the expression and the living of soul in life, your soul in your life. We must call that soul making dharma. It's not something separate. So offering these, part of the why, so that, that's why I share the story of that grief and regret. It's like, yeah, because sometimes there are things that are really important to our soul. And it's only the fact that we didn't take care of some really basic nuts and bolts that we actually were not able then to reap the benefit and play in the fields of the territories that we would have loved to. So this offering is so that you have that choice and you have a conscious choice. You can practice so you don't regret. We said, one of the things that yesterday was, you know, these are small pieces, these exercises, this emphasis on movement, gesture, voice. And the exercise will do this. They're kind of small, little, small pieces, but they're indispensable, both. So they're not super central, super big deal, but they're indispensable, both. So there's a kind of, not contradictory, but two sides of that statement, obviously. And where does it, how do you pick it up? What does it, what does hearing something like that do to your relationship and attitude to this whole notion of preliminaries and exercises and these particular ones that we're working through? So you probably want to avoid two extremes here. So they're small pieces, therefore one here is, nah, it's not important, and one maybe never bothers to do these exercises. Or, well, okay, I do them once or twice. That would be one extreme, and I think it would be probably a mistake for most people, maybe not for everyone, but for most people. Not for everyone. The other extreme that you want to avoid is then you hear this, okay, small pieces, but they're indispensable, and therefore I drop everything else, and I just spend hours every day doing these exercises, and I vow to do no other practices until I've completed three years of just these exercises every day or whatever it is. So as usual, a little bit of middle way can go a long way. Bringing some intelligence here, knowing one's patterns, recognizing one's kinds of inertia, one typically gets entrenched in or falls into, all that's really important. As usual, it's really about discernment and intelligence and applying that to one's practice. And just a small but important practical thing, I didn't say yesterday, but if anything in these exercises, if for any reasons, physical reasons or reasons of your health, if any part of an exercise or any exercise feels like, that wouldn't be good for my body, or that's just not possible for my body, or it would be dangerous or something, which is the case for me at this point, for one or two of these things. Just don't do it or adapt it. Understand, discern what the kernel of it, what the point is, and adapt it. Adapt it to your body, your body's condition right now and the needs and capabilities of your body right now. So let's move on and introduce exercise three. Now again, there's five exercises within this. So again, whether it's actually an exercise three or an exercise series three, I don't know, it doesn't matter, but there's five within them, I'll go through them. But again, each of these five could be done physically. In other words, that it's concretized into an actual movement and vocalization or whatever, movements and vocalizations could be done concretely, physically, or it can be done just with the energy body, so to speak, in the sense of the energy body, in the imagination only, and there's nothing physical or audible, perceptible there. So each of the five can be done in either or both of those ways, and I would encourage exploring both, really, really encourage exploring both, both the concrete, physical, and the not concretized, not physicalized, just the energy body, just the image sense. So I can give these sort of little nicknames, these five, I'm not sure I'm such a fan of the nicknames I've just come up with very hastily, but it doesn't really matter. You could just go by numbers or you can make your own nickname. The first one of the five I've just called something like Thunderclap or Thunder and Lightning. But don't take that, certainly don't take it too literally and don't take it too narrowly either. What I mean by this exercise, what I want to get at by this exercise, and I think this one is really, really important, is actually this one more than any other of all the exercises I'm offering that kind of was the start of this idea that something needs to be offered, it would be a good idea to offer something. This one I think is very important. What I mean is, the object is an emphatic, brief or sudden gesture or movement, maybe with a vocalization, but the whole thing is maybe two seconds, roughly. So something very emphatic and relatively short, and if there's a vocalization it's also relatively short. But within that, emphatic means there's force in it, there's power in it, there's energy and strength in it, and there is, soul is coming through, in this case I mean soul in a slightly more limited sense, or rather as a minimum in a limited sense, it may come through in a fully imaginal sense, but I don't necessarily mean that at the start, it's just an exercise. I mean soul coming through, soul as the spirit, the life force, the being, the person, the energy. And really it's coming through in a consolidation, in a gesture, in a movement, in a vocalization that consolidates, coheres, coalesces mind, intention, soul and body, in and through body movement, gesture or voice. So something like just a stamp of the foot and maybe some kind of gesture with the arms or the fists, or just a gesture with the arms, or just stamping the foot, feet or whatever, or a kick or a step or a karate chop, something like that. It's the movement itself, anyone can do the movement, you know, if you, well, some of us can't do these kinds of movements at this point, but most people without physical difficulty struggles can do something like that movement. What's much harder is to have that sense of real coming together, coherence, congruence, consolidation, coalescence, integration in that brief, whatever it is, two seconds, the integration of mind, intention, body, person, in and through the body movement, gesture and voice. And again, a vocalization could be anything, it could be a ha, or a slightly longer tone, or it really doesn't matter. And again, it could be, we talked about, it could be spontaneous, you don't actually know what you're going to do, you just feel the impulse and let that coalesce and let it come out, or it could be, it's a precise move, you've rehearsed it and you know exactly what it looks like and what it's going to sound like and you do that. This will apply, those two alternatives will apply to all of these five examples. So it would be easier if you could see me and I could demonstrate, even though I'm very limited in what I could do physically right now, but I hope you can get the sense of this. You know, when someone is doing kung fu or karate, in a way that's what they're doing, they chop bricks or whatever it is, or they make a move, that's part of their training, is to bring everything together, mind, intention, soul and body like that. And it's surprisingly rare and in some circles it's even more rare than it might be in other circles. So can I do this? Can I train in doing that? And as I said, I think, or for me, this is the most important one even perhaps of everything that I'm going to offer. And there's reasons for me saying I'll come back to that. But it may be you just think, well, I don't know, it doesn't sound very interesting at all. Just notice your response. After that, after you've done your gesture, if this was on retreat, if we were doing this on retreat or if this was a retreat setting and I was introducing this, I say, okay, the way we're going to do this is, let's say we have this whole week and whatever, if it's a week retreat and every day you're going to come into an interview room with me and I'm going to sit there and you're going to do this thunderclap or thunder enlightening movement gesture, vocalization thing. And so you just come in, prepare yourself and then you do it. And then in front of me and I'm watching you. And then after you do it, you assess it, maybe you say, oh yeah, felt like I wasn't quite in my feet there or I could feel I was holding back a little in my voice or I could feel like the energy was really coming through, but it was more, I guess, hysterical than coherent. It was a bit sort of, it wasn't really congruent like that. And then after you assess, I assess, I assess you. Okay, I'll explain why. This might sound like in our culture, this is a, in our Dharma culture, this would be a very odd thing, a kind of little exam where you have to do something in front of the teacher and then they sort of assess you. So I'll explain why that would even be part of it in a retreat setting. Of course, if you're not in retreat setting, then either you have to just do it on your own and you assess or you could do it with a Dharma friend, et cetera. But I think even the ability to really read these things in another person and sense them is also quite rare and something that needs developing and probably will only develop again through practice, for most people, will probably only develop through practice and through doing it oneself. And then some people will develop the ability to sort of get a sense with other people. So we can be easily misled in these areas, very easily misled and that's something I'll come back to later. So again, if we were on a retreat setting and I was introducing this and say that, okay, come once a day, we're going to do, you're going to do this thing, it will be a thread through your retreat. And you can practice these exercises or that exercises on your own as much as you want in motionless, silent meditation, just with the energy body and with the imaginal sense, the imaginative sense. And you can also practice, for example, if we were a guyhouse, you can go out onto the ground and just practice that as much as you want. And then once a day, you'd come and do this thing. So I'll come back to what that assessment bit about, I'll come back to that. Anyway, that's number one. So I hope I've conveyed something there of that, be easier to just see me, but anyway, we're recording this. So, okay, that's the first one. The second thread of this exercise number three is the second part is, again, I'm not sure about the name, but something like, call it born aloft by angels. So here, not two seconds, maybe you've got a maximum of two minutes, you don't have to use all that time, a maximum of two minutes, certainly more than 20 or 30 seconds, but somewhere between, let's say 30 seconds and two minutes. And you let your body, or you express with your body the image of being born aloft by angels. So somehow these beings who have no weight are bearing you aloft, are holding up your body on these gossamer threads of love and light, making your body buoyant, floating, light weightless. And your body in that can give itself to being held by the angels and moved by these angels. And the body in giving itself can become fluid. Your body becomes fluid in this sort of, the way that sometimes when they sell a party or something, you can lift someone up and if there's enough people, you can pass them along or in a big crowd or at a concert, pass people along hand to hand, a big crowd passes a person along. Something like that, but much more delicate and almost ethereal. So the body becomes fluid in surrendering oneself to that being held and being moved. So that another part of it is the surrendering oneself, surrendering one's energy body and body and heart as much as possible and soul. So probably in this no vocal, it's just moving your body in a way that expresses, expresses that as much as possible. And then again, if we were on retreat, you and I might take turns in assessing that. Third part of this exercise or the third exercise in this series of exercises is what we might call the raging beast. So I don't know what even comes up in your mind right now as a reaction when you hear raging beast. And of course there are many types of beast. Some have tails, some have horns, some have fangs, some have teeth, some have tongues, all kinds of stuff, you know, many kinds of beast. So we're not going to put a limit on that. It's just a raging beast or the raging beast. Maybe it's a ravenous beast. Maybe it's not. Maybe it's just raging. Careful how you hear this. Do you hear raging beast and then hear evil, for instance, or ill will? I certainly, to me it doesn't imply that. So I want to be very clear about this exercise. It does not imply evil necessarily at all or ill will. But again, somewhere between 30 seconds and 2 minutes, it might be that within that 30 seconds and 2 minutes there are, it may be that there are kind of bursts. So you have a little burst of letting this thing come through your body or feeling into your body and movement and gesture and vocalization that might come with that. And then that goes a little bit. You let it go and gather the intention, gather the chitta, gather the energy-body awareness and then do it again. Another burst of, you know, up to 15 seconds, whatever it is. This is all quite loose. Or it may be just 2 minutes straight, you're just really in this thing. Whatever. Again, vocalization is possible but not necessary. So maybe sometimes you do it and there's vocals that come with it, sometimes not. Maybe try both ways. And again, given, depending on the context, we would, both of us, kind of take turns in assessing that. Something more discerning, discriminating about what's working there, what's blocked, what's being included, what the issues are, what the areas of the body or ranges that are opening or not, etc. Okay, fourth one is something we might call something like the immovable protector or the immovable guardian. Maybe they're human, maybe they're inhuman, maybe they're demonic, maybe they're angelic, maybe they're animal, maybe they're some kind of mythic creature. It doesn't really matter. The immovable protector or guardian, what are they protecting? Maybe they're protecting the earth, maybe they're protecting in relation to some kind of social injustice or racial injustice or something or other. And that might change from time to time. What's core here is the immovable protector or an immovable guardian. And again, sort of maximum of 2 minutes may be possible that within those 2 minutes it's sort of broken up into little bursts of expression of movement, gesture, voice, perhaps up to 15 seconds and kind of gathering, stopping, regrouping, another burst, etc. It may be possible, and even in the name, the immovable protector may be possible with very little movement, but in the stance, in the gesture, in the feel of the energy body, the being, the mind, the soul, that image of an immovable protector guardian is gathered and expressed and manifest. So maybe a lot of movement, it may be a little movement, it may be very little movement, or even no movement, but it's in the gesture, it's in the stance, it's in the posture, it's in the feel of the energy body, or it may be in the voice. And again, if we were in a certain context, we would do this double assessment then, or assessing twice. Okay, so that's the fourth one, the fifth one. Just going to call it the serpent. The serpent. But I'm not going to say anything about it. What does it mean, the serpent? What might it mean? What's the range of possibility that it might mean? The serpent. Again, maybe up to two minutes, and may include vocal, maybe not, don't know, but the serpent. There's a couple of deliberate reasons I'm not saying anything, in terms of what that might be. I'm just going to say that. So five parts, each possible both concretized and physical, or just in the energy body, just in the imaginal sense, image sense, imaginative sense. Because, as I said, it might not be completely imaginal, and that's fine. And also, as I mentioned, it might be that they're just spontaneous and improvised movements, gestures, vocalizations, or it might be they're quite rehearsed, and you know precisely what the body and voice are going to do beforehand. Okay, so try both ways. Okay, let's say, so those are the five with the variations, with this one. I'm calling exercise number three, or maybe series number three. Okay, a little bit more about the why. As I said, especially that first one, what we're calling the thunderclap, and what's it, thunder and lightning. This kind of ability to really gather the chitter, the intention, the soul, the mind, the body, the movement, the gesture, the voice, to gather it powerfully into one kind of coherent, congruent expression, gesture, movement, energy. It's quite rare. And I have come to wonder recently whether it's even rarer in some Dharma circles. So I can, and including our Dharma circle, basically. The capacity to actually do that seems quite rare. In different ways, a person avoids it, never manifests it, falls short of it, falls shy of it, prevents it, has a bit of it, but there's a sort of hollow bit in the middle, all kinds of possibilities. Many many possibilities. So it's often that kind of coherence of body, mind, energy and soul is often missing as a possibility. It's like the circuits are just not there, or they're cut, or they're missing. And what can happen when, if we call them frieze, the circuits or that territory is missing, they're cut, is that certain kinds or certain range of images then for soul making practitioner who's interested in imaginary practice, certain kinds and ranges of images won't arise. Everything is blocked in that, those circuits or cut, those circuits just aren't connected, and it limits what arises imagine. Like I said before, if the Erosiculogos dynamic is strong enough and it's stronger, more powerful in its movement than whatever blocks are there or limits or whatever holding is there, then an image can arise that actually breaks open or reconnects those circuits. A flame, a spark jumps over and in jumping over connects two points, reignites, makes available again, reconfigures that circuit. It comes from the power of the soul making dynamic in constellating an image and that image does something, the power of the image and the image is allowed to do something or has enough soul making power in it to do something and it reconstitutes, it reconfigures, it reforms that circuit if we're going to use the language circuit. But oftentimes as I said that won't happen and so this circuit is cut, those particular circuits are cut and certain kinds of images and a certain range of images just won't arise, they don't arise in practice, they can't because the circuit is cut. It's cut in relationship to well kinds of things, movement, gesture, voice and energy body possibility and self view and all kinds of things in there. But then also then there won't be soul making in that direction because those images won't arise, so there won't be soul making in formal practice, meditation practice in that direction without those images because the circuits are cut. But it also may well be the case that there won't be soul and soul making in certain areas of one's life. There won't be the possibility of insolement of soul and soul making in certain directions of duty and certain kinds of manifestation. And both these lacunae, both these gaps, both these impossibilities of the images to arise or of the impossibility of soul opening, traveling, moving, manifesting in certain directions in one's life, all kinds of consequences come from that regarding one's psychology, one's whole psyche regarding the heart, regarding relationships with others, regarding one's duties, so to speak, in life and soul duties included regarding possibilities for one's life, regarding work, regarding life choices that we make. And it may well be that we don't even realize that this is going on or for instance why I'm making this choice and not that choice. I don't realize it's because this circuit is blocked or it's cut, it's not available, therefore the soul, the soul making and the soul cannot move in that direction and therefore certain choices don't even occur to me or I just make them but I don't even know why I'm making this choice over that choice. So oftentimes this kind of thing is going on but a person doesn't even realize. All kinds of consequences, psychological, emotional, relational, in terms of work, in terms of life choices, duties, possibilities, etc. I just want to say, I forget about these exercises but I don't know if this or that, it's just not me or it's not relevant to me, I don't know this thing, yeah I participated but I did it a few times but it just doesn't feel like it's not relevant or I'm just not interested. It will seem that way but actually it's because the circuit is cut. So actually some can be very hard to discern really what's going on here. So all this is by way of saying careful if you have resistance to some of these exercises, resistances to some of these exercises which may, you know, it's probably very normal and of course you're free to do whatever you want and pick up and put down and it's completely up to you. I'm just, you know, inviting you to take care, I mean to have a closer look, have some questioning there, have some, you know, real inquiry and rummaging around and wondering and in this case it's really wondering about one's whole life and the whole patterns of one's life. It's not just wondering about how I felt in that moment when my friend suggested let's do that exercise and I was like, yeah okay, or I listened and then I felt like, it's alright. Just an invitation to really ponder is there something, a much larger trajectory, absence of trajectory here, in one's life, patterning, limitation, blind spots, incapacities, impossibilities. Then you can do what you want but just the invitation to take care and to really inquire into that. So and if, you know, maybe you do this stuff maybe once or twice and then you neglect again the question why, why would you neglect this? And again as a real question, as a genuine inquiry. I said it's not that everyone needs to do all this because some people may already have all that range available. If we just talk about these five we just talked about today or include let's say the ones we did yesterday. They already have all that range available. It's all available vividly and vitally and juicily and soulfully in image, in the energy body, in their physical body and voice in the manifestation there, available in their life. For some people it's all there. Not really interested in spending my time doing that and yeah, why would you need to? You don't need to. I don't need to practice the C major scale again or I don't need to practice that particular technique again because I've taken it as, you know, it's as developed as it's going to be. I can move on to developing other things. But just to know that if that's not the case, if all that range is really not available or not really available in the range of images, in the energy body, in the physical body, in the life, in the directions of one's life, in the expressions and manifestations of one's life, then there will be consequences. Most likely there will be consequences, there will be further consequences and those consequences will include limitations on soul making in life. There will be consequences to neglecting and not picking up and just kind of giving in to one's inertia without really examining it and questioning it. So always the choice must be yours, you must have that autonomy. But just a real, you know, you can hear, it's a strong encouragement to inquire and to question really, do I really know what's going on for me here? And here doesn't just mean here and now, it means in my life and the patterns of my life, the choices of my life and the directions I end up taking and not taking. Some of these examples are said to take, you know, two seconds or three seconds or less to do, but the circuits they need may have been shut down or, you know, short circuited or chopped or snipped or whatever for decades, decades. So it can seem like the exercise is really not a big deal, it's a two second thing, you know, but the circuits that they need to do, the circuits that are involved in these exercises or that exercise in a way I'm trying to reinstigate may have been shut down for decades and therefore it may take, I don't know, repeated practice, certainly maybe a long time of pre-practice, I don't know, to be able to do these exercises well, to do them properly. Even that first one I was talking about, this sort of sudden emphatic thunderous gesture and movement and vocalisation, to really show up there, congeal with force, with all my soul force and power, not held back, embodied, fully embodied, fully, not congealed, that's the wrong word, coalesced, congruent. It may take a while to do them well, to do them properly, to develop that, I don't know. So all this is not for the sake of self-empowerment, it's not for the sake of winning friends and influencing people, it's not for the sake of making you more attractive, it's not for the sake of making you more whole or more integrated, it's not for the sake of some kind of catharsis, oh yeah, get my anger out or whatever it is. But it's primarily so that, as I said, if the soul wants to manifest in image, in energy body, in emotion or in life and in duty in life, using these kinds of faces, expressing these kinds of theophanies, if that's what soul wants through you, through image, through energy body, through emotion, through life and duty, if that's what soul wants, it can. That's the primary purpose for these kinds of exercises. Secondarily through that, I think, through doing these exercises, some of the ones we've done on other retreats as well and some of the ones we did yesterday, and we'll go and do that, it can also, as I said, begin to awaken and ignite the possibility of sensing our everyday movement gesture and vocalizations of them being sensed with soul, and that them being in any way extraordinary. This is part of sensing ourselves and sensing others with soul, other aspects of the being, other aspects of life begin to be dimensionalized in that way, as we said. So, why this business about the assessment and the sort of exam situation very unusual in our Dharma tradition? Of course, in other Dharma traditions, it's rare, but it does exist absolutely in other Buddhist Dharma traditions, excuse me. Why would I include that if we were in a different situation, if we were actually on retreat? And I was introducing this. Why? Because being seen and judged makes it usually, for most people, more challenging. One gets self-conscious, one holds back, all kinds of reasons, and someone doesn't even know the reason. But that's actually part of it, because again, if we think about what the relationship here is between these exercises and the possible manifestations or duties, work, whatever it is that soul will ask you to do, will want you to do. Those too, the manifestations of your duties will be seen and judged in the world and by the world. And what happens then? What happens to our energy, to our voice, to our expression through the body when we feel or know that we are being seen and judged by the world? So putting that piece in, the assessment, the sort of exam piece, actually makes it more difficult usually and more challenging. And that's actually part of it because that reflects, mimics the actual situation that soul finds itself in, in life. Soul is in life. And so that's what we need to work with. And still, I think, I still think, or I wonder if still, it can be hard, not easy to understand why, why, why these exercises, why, why are we introducing this? So I've introduced it with a few people now, just a few. And sometimes some of the exchanges and trying to explain it, sometimes the person understands immediately but actually it's often easier when I'm demonstrating something that they seem to understand immediately, but then often after that, they sort of forget and they veer off into something else. Something's happened, the practices diverted or they forget it. So something that they understood instantaneously with me working one on one in a room with them and showing them something and they just got it immediately through me sort of giving example with body voice and gesture. And they seem to get it and it's all fine. Then it just kind of veers off into something else. They've lost the understanding why or they forget or they drag in other kind of propensities or habits of view, etc. Or what can happen is if I'm not demonstrating, it's actually very difficult for a person to, it can be, it seems to me, understand what it is that we're talking about or why this is important. Sometimes even working with a person with an energy body and voice and it can feel very alien. They're not really sure what we're getting at or they can't really tell the difference in two, say, movements or vocalizations they made. They can't really even tell the difference between them in the regard of what we're talking about, how much one is there, how much is radiating and filling a space, these kinds of things. Or sometimes I might suggest to a person when you learn to sing that song and sing it in a way with the full energy and really with the whole body, like we were talking about yesterday's exercises and with the whole presence there and being and person coming through and not held back in the voice and the body and all of that stuff. And remember one person suggested, first time he suggested the idea, sort of saying, you know, choose something like, you know, like, I don't know, a heavy metal song or a punk song or something. That was a misdirection in terms of the teaching I gave. It can be that genre but actually the singer, if we're talking about singers, is actually they're quite held back and contracted and they're not really fully in their voice or fully their body is not really expressing things. And it might, at superficial glance, it's actually quite hard to even discern it, it seems, to discern in other people. It might look like, well, the guy's raging around and jumping about on stage and he's clearly very angry about something or other. But actually there's a tremendous amount of contraction and block there and the voice is almost being squeezed out through a tiny little hole. Or say this song and that song, we don't recognize where the singer is actually fully, let's say, not holding back in their voice. They're fully inhabiting their voice and their energy is fully inhabiting the space that they're in and fully reaching the audience and the physical space that they're in and their whole body is involved and their whole body is emanating, radiating the sound and the song and the spirit of the song, etc. And it can be hard for someone to realize when that's the case and when it's not the case. Both the two songs, good songs, they're both good singers, etc. We're talking about something else here. Or as I said, might be try this with people and they're just, I don't know, that just didn't land, it just doesn't seem, I don't think that's relevant to me, it might be for other people, I don't think it's relevant to me or I don't think I need that. Or it just doesn't interest me. So that's also something that I've encountered in exactly the people that I would really disagree with their assessment there. It's precisely a small but absolutely indispensable piece that they don't have yet, that's very relevant, that they do need and that they should be interested in, would be my opinion. So it's really interesting what can happen here in terms of the whole sense and view of this whole area. It can just completely pass one's by, like pass one by as if we just don't recognize there's anything of significance or value or personal relevance here at all. Or for other people it can be just the whole thing, and I think this was the case when we did those exercises in that retreat, which admittedly were, some of them were quite intense and some of them were comical and the person can be, was the voice movement possible to so I think, and I think for a couple of people it's just so alien, those kinds of ranges of vocalization or expression or manifestation of body or gesture, just really unusual for them and not at all what they associate with spirituality or dharma or anything like that. They might not even say that, perhaps out of respect etc but, but it's there and it just doesn't fit a kind of picture or ideal view that they have and it's very, very alien. So, to me this is not just the doing of it but also the whole, the whole sense of it and the whole capacity to discern both its significance but also its presence or its absence, as we were just talking about the first of these five exercises, we could talk about any of them, is something that can be strikingly undeveloped for practitioners who in other ways may be very well developed, very well developed. So I find that really, really interesting. You know sometimes, again I'm still on the why really, aspects of the why, sometimes working with someone in an interview one to one or whatever and it might be there's an emotion or a dukkha or a frustration or something that's there that they've brought in, maybe they weren't even aware of it when they came in, maybe they were aware of it, it doesn't matter, this emerges, this emotion, this dukkha, this frustration. And with guidance, with the one to one guidance, they can, you know, they help to relate to that emotion, dukkha, frustration, so that it kind of opens something and creates something, instigates something in the energy body and maybe as an image. And maybe both, maybe in any order, maybe the image comes first and then the energy body experience all the way, vice versa. Here's this difficulty and then with the guidance and that kind of crucibility care that's there, something emerges or it transforms it, the alchemy there allows something to transubstantiate really in manifest in the energy body as image. And that manifestation in energy body and or as image opens up in that moment a whole new sense of self and also sense of the body. So I've given different examples of that over the years and talks. That's quite, that would be quite a common occurrence. But often then, what happens is that sense of that new sense of self and open sense of body or whatever capacity etc. will revert back to the usual shapes and structures. And oftentimes that reversion happens after not very long at all. So that's also, sometimes not, but that's also quite common. When it happens, it's quite a dramatic experience, the sense of something alchemically emerging in the energy body and the image and the beauty and the power of the image and the soul being touched by the image and the new sense of self and even more, it's all like wow. But the purpose here in these exercises is not so much the wow and the dramatic experience. So what we have in those examples from interviews etc. is a kind of dramatic emergence of something that does kind of, you know, very understandably trigger a kind of wow response and is a dramatic compelling experience. This is not what we're aiming for here. It's more like, it's more like we're talking about etudes or even less than etudes. It's certainly in these first three exercises, they're more like just scales or technical exercises. They're not necessarily going to feel amazing. Probably won't, I mean they might do actually, so you really don't want to limit things. But the point is to view more as scales and technical exercises. So on that point, and again thinking about pedagogy in a larger way, you know, if you were to ask me, looking back over my Dharma practice and retreats and all that, if you were to ask me about dramatic experiences and dramatic openings etc. that I've had over the years, I could describe many I'm sure, but you know I could say well that happened in this situation, that other thing happened in that situation, whatever it is. So I could tell you about dramatic experiences and dramatic openings. But if you ask me another question, what has made really long-term differences in terms of long-term openings, long-term being helpful, long-term, the answer would not necessarily be the same as dramatic experiences. Think about, I think about, for example, different let's say week or 10 day retreats that I've done. And there's been a number where I could say, oh yes it was on that week retreat where I had that experience that was pretty amazing and on that other week retreat that that dramatic experience happened etc. But the answer to the second question about what made long-term differences would not be the same. So actually what seems to have made long-term differences, if I'm answering this question just myself now, is the possibility or when I have been able to repeat something, repeat a practice, do it over and over again. A practice on attack that's helpful, relevant, but also has some eros for me, that's alive for me, that's growthful and that's an edge and therefore is interesting and exciting. And I've been in a situation either because I'm on personal retreat and I don't have to listen to everyday new instructions or whatever it is from the teacher and go along with the group. I've been on personal retreat and just follow my own thread there and develop this thing, develop this practice that I'm exploring or discovering or whatever it is. Or so either on personal retreat or in everyday life, just everyday, getting on a getting on a track, something that I'm really interested in and developing, repeating it, developing it, growing with it. So that would be more my answer to what has made, what has really made genuine long-term difference in helpful ways, different kinds of helpful ways. So the answers to what has been amazing, dramatic wow experiences, how much does it overlap with my answer to what has really made long-term genuine, genuinely helpful differences. If I asked you the same question, what would you think? What would you answer? And careful not to confuse the wow factor, the feel-good factor, the dramatic factor with what makes a long-term difference. That may be something you want to reflect because you might have a different answer, but it may be something you want to reflect on. I've been on other retreats, you know, remember going on some Goenka retreats and getting a lift back with a group of people in a big truck or van, whatever, and they were talking and we were talking and listening and a lot of them it seemed had come from backgrounds where they were really kind of, I don't know what the word would be, like they partied hard, you know, and they had a very little discipline in their lives and some of them had addiction issues and at least that's how they would put it. And then they came on a Goenka retreat and it's suddenly like in almost like being thrown into high-discipline prison sort of structure compared to their life where there was no discipline. Sit, sit, sit, they don't even walk, just sit, sit, sit, and sit through the pain again, again, again, many hours a day, etc. And for quite a few of these people it seemed that doing this 10-day ultra-disciplined Goenka course for them really did kind of dramatically break the momentum of the the unhelpful patterns in their life, like the lack of discipline in their life and whatever else, the really hard partying and whatever. The bit thrown into that context of the Goenka retreat with all this discipline and the pressure of that and the intensity of that and the sort of, what's the word, the kind of continuity of intense effort, etc., made a dramatic break and after the retreat it was enough that dramatic break could generate a kind of momentum for their everyday practice and life to be changed, to kind of keep up a discipline and good habits that they felt they had lacked, etc. So it may well be then in those kinds of cases that drama and the dramatic wow experience, even if it's dramatic unpleasant, but oftentimes there would be a break in the retreat and things would get a lot easier and pleasant if you know those kinds of retreats sometimes. But either way some dramatic experience did allow and did support a more long-term long-term helpful change and life changes as well. But in other, let's say, styles or emphases of practice, is it going to be the same? So for example soul making now is a very different flavor of retreat, the whole tenor of the retreat, the whole atmosphere, what we're doing, how we're doing it, the flavor of softness as opposed to intense pressure and effort and heart, all these kinds of things, but particularly what we're doing and how we're going about it, it's not the same. So it may not apply the fact that you go somewhere, you have an amazing experience, it was so beautiful this experience on that seven-day soul making retreat or whatever, or it could be another kind of retreat, it was a metta retreat, or this or that, it was so beautiful, the heart was so open, or just a vipassana retreat. There's something that touches one deep, of course that's important, that's lovely, but that doesn't necessarily translate as making a long-term difference. So something to think about, and there's something for us to think about as we go forward as a Sangha with soul making, again pedagogically, with regard to pedagogy to think about here, is it necessary this model of week-long group retreats is really the most fertile, the most soul making in the end? Beautiful as the experience of that week can be, or some of the experiences on that week can be touching, and might it be that something more steady courses, classes, groups etc actually provide more support, a different kind of support and a necessary kind of support for making a real more long-term difference in terms of soul and soul making, what soul needs. So that's something to think about, I don't know, just thinking about it. But really again with these exercises, to think of them more as technical exercises, like practicing scales, as opposed to something that's going to create a suddenly amazing experience because this image came, or this something, I mean it might be, but that's not the point so much, and that's certainly not how to judge them, that's not the way we should be judging them. It's something like practicing scales, or to shift the analogy from the musician to the instrument, it's something like, I don't know if you had a, this is not such a good analogy, but if you had a piano where let's say these keys here get stuck, if they don't get played a lot, they just get stuck, so they end up pressing them, and it makes no sound, then you go and you're trying to play, or improvise something, or play your piano piece or whatever, and you reach that note and nothing comes out because the key is just stuck. This is a very bad analogy, but maybe if every day had been played more and kind of wouldn't have, you know, you can free those keys up so they don't get stuck, then they're available for the music. But what we're really talking about again is what soul might need. So yes, there's some, what we could call psychological health reasons, why these exercises are a good idea, or might be a good idea for some people in some stages of their life, but even those psychological health reasons we can conceive them as being, if you like, on a continuum with soul reasons. The soul might need that kind of psychological health, the soul said might need for those circuits to be connected and working and available in movement, in gesture, in body, in voice. And as I said, there's consequences, or there may be consequences, let's put it that way, there may be consequences, all kinds of consequences, which I think are not necessarily obvious at all. So, you know, sometimes what can happen is we don't let, or another way of saying, what we've been talking about is we don't let certain kinds of body movement or expression or expressions of voice, manifestations of voice, we don't let that in to the body, into the possibilities of movement, gesture, voice. And it might be certain, I'm going to use that word dark, it can mean so many different things, but some of the kind of examples we're giving in this exercise, in exercise number three, that those kinds of darker faces and expressions, again, that doesn't have anything to do with evil. I'm not using that word synonymously at all, but they're not let into the body, the body is not open to that, the expression, the voice, the gesture and the movement are not open to that. Sometimes those kinds of things may come as images for a person, but it may not be enough, may not be enough. It may be that their soul wants more images like that, or a fuller range, or more depth to images like that, and we're only getting a trickle of what could come through. Or it may be just that just the fact of having images alone is not enough, and I'll come back to that. And it may even be that in blocking the dark images, somehow there's also a kind of blocking of more, if you like, more light images, more kind of conventionally or traditionally angelic kind of images. And that's not obvious at all, it's because I'm not letting this dark into the body that actually then, in my imaginal practice, there's also a block of a certain kind of range of light images. We want the whole range of images, soul wants the whole range of images to be available. And remember that talk, I hope you remember it, five, the spreading of five wings, I think it's called. Again, this very much has to do with inertia and limits and blocks and ideas, and stuck places and contractions, five kinds of range that we want to check that we're open to, spreading of five wings, I think it was called. We want the whole range of images, soul wants the whole palette to be available for its art. And it wants that, not just in imaginal practice, but also in the body and in the voice, the expressions of body and voice, movement, gesture, etc. So there's consequences, consequences for our form of practice, consequences for our life, consequences for what soul can do. There may be other consequences as well, you know, it might be that, for example, in not letting some of the kinds of movement, gesture, and voice that we've pointed to in the exercises today, in exercise number three, it may be that that also affects the, for example, the how we are with anger. So it might be that in not opening up the circuits in the body and the voice in these ways, that actually affects the mind in terms of anger, and a kind of anger that's possible then doesn't have body and voice in it. It might also not have a range of images, as we said, in it. It has a very narrow range, and in that it might be a couple of things. It might be then that the mind gets into quite black and white thinking and viewing, and that's something that often goes with anger. When anger is not so healthy, it gets very black and white, the thinking and the viewing. But there may well be a relationship between the prevention, the absence, the block, the non-existence of those circuits of movement, gesture, and voice, and the entrenchment and habit of black and white thinking and viewing, even when things are rosy and we think something's wonderful, and that's just all taken as the truth. It really is this way. This person really is that way. So we never think, what's the connection? And I think there's a connection between what we allow to move through and to open through and open in and as movement, gesture, voice, what's available there. There's a connection between that and something like the kind of black and white thinking and viewing that's really not helpful. Certainly not when there's anger, but also when there's a kind of positive assessment of something. Even if you're praising someone, they might end up feeling a little bit put in a box that they don't feel comfortable with. Even you're saying this or that about them or about something they've done. But actually it's black and white. It's something entrenched and something, this is connected with the second aspect I want to draw a link to, because something can be brittle here without letting things, without opening up the movement, gesture, voice in these kinds of ways. Something can, again, not just black and white in our thinking, viewing when we're angry or when there's positivity, but also then brittle. And again, if we're talking about anger, that anger can be merely cold anger. And that's all that's available to me as opposed to a hot, juicy anger. Cold anger is not far from hatred in certain ways of using those words, but cold anger is also kind of brittle. And again, there's a kind of brittleness that can come into the being through, again, just through the non-availability of some of these circuits with regard to body and voice. The anger can be brittle and not have depth to it, not have juice, not have, and I'm thinking of a spicy, juicy curry sauce, it doesn't have that in it. There's something cold and brittle in it. And then being brittle, it easily shatters. And something shatters in the being, not in a helpful way. And something shatters in the anger, in what we're trying to stand up against or for, what we're trying to express and the point we're trying to make whatever, something shatters and there's a collapse, a collapse in the being, and there's no strength there. So the collapse, because of the shattering, because of the brittleness, because of the non-availability of these areas and circuits and directions and possibilities in movement, gesture and voice, the connection we all have with black and white thinking, black and white viewing. So this is not, I think, obvious at first. Again, I would say in some cases, I think it's significant and important to be investigated. I certainly wouldn't insist, this is the only way things work or it works like this for everyone, not at all, but to be investigated. This is the kind of thing we would never think to connect these aspects. So there's a relationship here to everything we're talking about. There is a relationship to the question which I brought up, I think several times, but recently, gosh, now I can't remember, might have been in the talk about pain on Psyche's Orchard. But anyway, somewhere, a few places in the last while, I brought up this question, I have at least, about, for example, ritual and when is it necessary? We have this question in relation to energy, body and movement. We've had it before, long before, the question is about ritual. When is it necessary for, let's say, an image of ritual to be manifested and concretized in an actual ritual? So this whole question about movement, gesture, body, movement, gesture, voice, vocalization is connected with that. When is it necessary for an image to be manifested, concretized as an image or if it's an image of dancing or moving or whatever it is to be manifest that way? And then we can break that question down into two kind of temporal levels, if you like. So one is, when is it necessary for the sense and the possibility of soul making in the moment? Do I open up more of a sense of soul making right now by actually concretizing a ritual gesture, manifesting it or a movement in the body that's connected with the image? Or do I get more soul making, does more soul making open if I don't and I just let it brew in the image and in the energy body and in the soul resonances and the physical body remains still? But then there's a second temporal level. What about the possibility of soul making in one's life more long term? So what is necessary to, if you like, open up, support the most soul making right now in this moment? And then what about in one's life and more long term? Inactment, concretization, manifestation or not? And it can work both ways. So it's not like there's one answer, it's just complex, it's a question, it's a living question, it's a, again, back to the question of subtle soul discernment, receptivity, openness of being, inertia. So two temporalities to concern ourselves with. If we're talking about, let's take the example that this image comes. And right now with this image, what is it that allows it to become more soul making? Is it moving the body or is it being still? Is it concretizing or not? And then the second, what is it that allows that image to engender and open and instigate more, you know, the fullness or a fuller soul making in my life over the long term? So you may not need concretization or expression, a reflection of the image in body or voice, but it will at least need a kind of refraction into duty. The image needs to be refracted somehow into duty. And what will that need? What will that need from movement, gesture, voice? And are they available for that? Are they open? Are the circuits working? So there's lots of discernments, lots of questions here. And, you know, sometimes the soul may want to express itself through movement, gesture, voice, but those are blocked. And they're blocked so much, as released to what I said earlier, that person doesn't even feel the want. Those circuits are so cut. There's such an absence of electric flow there, if we use that analogy, that they don't even feel the soul wanting to express in that way through movement, gesture, voice. So maybe that if some of these exercises re-establish the circuits, reconnect those circuits, um, then we have an actual choice, listening as possible. We will recognize a want. Then we can choose whether we can discern what's right and how, etc. Sometimes something is so cut that we don't even feel the soul's want. If the circuit is alive, we're more likely to be able to feel the soul want, the soul's want, if there is one. Then we can make the choice. Then we can listen better. So, sometimes, um, all these kinds of openings, you know, it's normal for a human being to have blocks, to have limits, to have areas of soul that are just not, not in soul yet, not alive yet, to have areas of unconsciousness. All this is very, very normal, areas of limitation, areas where there's just barred entry, all that. It's very, very normal, so please understand that in context as well. And sometimes what happens, um, um, is the angels come, the daemons come, and image come, natural figures come, and help you, help me with something that is not, that is a difficulty for me, that hasn't been alive, that's been an impossibility. So, it could be exactly these kinds of ranges of movement, gesture, voice, that we've been talking about, these kinds of expression. The angels come and they help, and imagine, an image comes, an imaginal figure comes, and so from the power of the image given with the image, and through the way of relating to the image, I, I am helped to re, revitalize, open, and travel in that area of being an area of life. Um, and maybe other issues, and maybe, you know, in the Ridwan school, Catherine was telling me they have this thing they, I think they call it impeccability, and what they really mean is just the capability, the capacity to really be steady, and grounded, and consistent, and follow through with your plans, um, or what you said, you know, honour your word, if you said you would do this, you'd really do it, I think it's called impeccability, it's like one of their little areas. So, it may be, for instance, that's not really there, or in some areas that's not there, and it's the, we are helped by the visitations of the angels and the demons, and the ministrations of the angels and the demons, and the encouragement and the prodding, and sometimes the tough love of the angels, the demons, the imaginal figures. And then we're able, that area, um, is then open to us, it comes alive, we're able to travel in that landscape, that territory, that sole territory, both in imaginal practice and in life. Or, as I say, it might be, be this, this, the range of bodily vocal openings and expressions that we're talking about in these talks, and then, and then they become available, we can use them, and that's great, and it was from the grace of the angel, in a way, also, of course, needs me to, as always, needs me to relate to ascent, and to relate in certain ways that allow that image to become genuinely imaginal, so that it has its full soul power. So sometimes things work that way around, from the angel, so to speak, by the grace of the angel, still needing our work. But other times it's, um, the exercises themselves, which will support soul making, um, at the two temporal levels that we, we talked about, so that, that, um, they will, the exercises will open the possibility of images that are impermanent, but that come, and that feel, and that are soul making and soulful in that, in that time that they're around, and maybe whenever they visit after that. But these exercises may also support with the longer term, longer arc of manifestation and opening of soul in one's life, the refraction of the Daemon, Daemon's in one's life, the duty to the images in one's life, the human being living one's image, the capacity of the person to live one's image, to really live one's image, to embody it, to manifest, to refract. So sometimes we're helped by the angels, and the angels open the territory, the angels reconnect the circuits, and sometimes we have to do this kind of more exercise work, and that opens the circuits, and then they're open for the angels. Our practice and our life is open for soul, for the images, for the angels, and for our human refracting of Daemon, of Angel, for our expressions and manifestations of soul. Please consider supporting DharmaSeed with a year-end gift. Your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all. Visit dharmaseed.org to learn more, and thanks.

 OK, hello everyone. There's a few things I would like to offer as I'm making this recording, these recordings. I think usually I would probably have waited a little longer to want to gather a little more material around these topics, and to just hope that I felt a little bit more capable physically and mentally. But despite the difficulties, I think it's probably wiser not to wait and just take this window of opportunity as it presents itself right now as I don't know what the future will bring. So a few things I wanted to offer, and really they're mostly their kind of exercises, that's the way I'm thinking about them, like ichudz or exercises or preliminaries, if you know that word that's used in Tibetan Buddhist Circle. Preliminary exercises, preliminary trainings, preliminary requirements, preliminary developments. Of course it's a little strange how many years we are into unfolding the soul making teachings to start now putting out, you know, beginning to accrue a set of preliminary exercises, but the teachings have grown very organically, and as we grow we kind of recognise this is needed, that's needed, this is what we need to add here. So it doesn't matter anyway. So I'd like to offer some what we might call preliminaries, some exercises. Primarily these exercises involve centre around movement and gesture, so the physical body and movement and gesture, or the bodily experience, let's say movement and gesture, and voice, movement gesture and voice. And woven into that hopefully I'd like to kind of include some thoughts and teachings about soul, about personhood, and about human being, anthropology if you like, because it's very much woven into the way we're thinking about all this. So preliminaries at this stage of development, of the growth, the organic growth of the teachings, this is a beginning, and a beginning at least to this offering of this, whatever I will offer in these talks, is a beginning that can hopefully be developed, it should be developed, it will naturally, should naturally evoke, suggest, elicit development, and hopefully that development will be a very discerning, congruent, sensitive, appropriate, intelligent, movement, gesture, voice, these are huge areas, and we can add all kinds of things willy-nilly just because we like it, or we have a history there, or it makes us feel good, or whatever, but hopefully these kinds of exercises can be added to, can be developed, and naturally is the way of soul making, of things that get swept up into the soul making dynamic they will develop, they have to develop. So this is a beginning, hopefully they will be developed, and grow and become more sophisticated, wider, further, deeper, etc., more varied. Actually, it's not even a complete beginning, because I have, and many of you already know that, there have been other teachings offered on, that focus on movement, gesture, voice, etc. So in a way, what we're going to say in these talks, offering these talks, adds to that thread that's already there, in fact through other talks, through other exercises that have been given out in the past, through instructions and guided meditations from the past, however long it is, five years, or whatever, six years. And I can't remember the names, I remember I had a quick look before, earlier today, so there was a couple of talks called voice movement and the possibilities of soul, guided meditations, exercises, instructions on there, there's something called the movement of devotion, if I remember, and a couple of versions of that, and perhaps they may have been the first one, I think I explained, well, I just started it all too subtle, too difficult for a first thing. So as I said, the teachings are growing kind of organically rather than in any linear way, they're presented over the years in, in a chronological order of presentation of the years, doesn't necessarily match how one would if one was starting from zero, so to speak, to unfold the soul making time, it doesn't at all match that. Anyway, so there's that one movement of devotion, there's even things, for example, guided meditations we did, hearing all sounds as mantra, a dual line world, things like that, those kinds of things that we've done, where there's a lot going on, there's a lot of instructions going out, I'm asking people in the room to chant and move and do this and that and interact with each other. And while they're doing that, I may have been giving instructions, kind of throwing them into the space at the same time. It's a very, very understandable if a lot of those instructions didn't get so well absorbed, taken on if that kind of practice didn't get built on and repeated. If the principles hidden in those instructions that were in the mix of this very complex, effectively intense social situation, guided meditation, new experiences, etc. Very understandable if the principles hidden in the instructions, underlying the instruction, the girding instructions were not drawn out and capitalized upon and made clear, of course. Very understandable. And also too, similarly in rituals and ceremonies that we've done, we've played with, there's often kind of background instructions thrown in, but there's so much going on in the choreography and the sociality and interactions of that whole larger situation there, that it would be very surprising if those were taken on board as instructions in a way that one would actually build on them, or even recognize that there was anything there to build on, or to extract. So all that's completely understandable. And even recently, in the last few months, I remember in, it was one of those online seminars, I can't remember what it was called, but it was something to do with engagement and activism. And I remember just saying something about the energy body and devotion and throwing something out and intending it really as a set of meditation instructions. But it was way too quick, way too quick in explaining that and expecting people to actually hear, oh, this is a set of instructions, and I can take this and practice it and do it a lot like I do my breath meditation a lot. So I didn't set it up that way, I didn't take the time that way, just because there's a million other things to talk about, or it seems to me there always is, so I'm always in a rush. And similarly on the gyanaratri, actually on the gyanaratri, at some point, might even have been in the opening talk, I did guide people very briefly through a meditation with body and devotion and energy body, etc. But again, how many people will actually take that out and extract it and capitalize on it and repeat it, isolate it and repeat it as something as a practice, as a set of instructions that are developable remains to be seen. Anyway, so a beginning here, and that will be developable, but actually not really a beginning because it ties in with other threads that we've put out in all these different talks. And so, in a way, following on from what I've just said, an implication, which here I'm going to draw it out now, one could, if one gets really interested in this stuff, go back to all those talks and listen again, and listen to what's being said in the background and those instructions that one might miss, and take the material out, extract it, write it down, make a set of instructions, start practicing it. So there's an invitation there. Of course that's much more work for you as a listener or as a sangha than if I just offer these instructions there and it's a separate thing and you can just, all you have to do is press play and follow the instructions. But there's the invitation. So, why this area? I'm going to explain more why this area around the movement gesture and voice. I'm going to explain more later as we go on. But it's very much connected with this idea of preliminaries and what's necessary, what's required to, if we use a certain analogy, to be able to fly in soul making practice, to really be able to soar on the air currents and glide easily and gracefully and freely to wheel around and cartwheel and maneuver. A lot is required and sometimes the pieces that are required, they're really obvious, like well, two wings are required, whatever that analogy might be in soul making dharma. We need these really big structural pieces. But other times what's required may not be obvious at all. So in this beautiful bird's anatomy there may be a tiny little bone somewhere that just connects, for instance, this part of, this bone in the neck, let's say, to a bone, a particular bone in the wings, a tiny little bone. And the muscles are a tiny little muscle. It doesn't seem that significant, but take it away and maybe the bird can even still fly a little bit. But what, its freedom of movement, its ease, its gracefulness, its security, severely curtailed there. So to be able to fly, we need all kinds of things, some of which are obvious and some of which are less obvious. There are some trainings which are really obvious and some trainings which are really less obvious. And some which are obviously very central and some which are really not. We don't actually notice them at first. So it fits, that might be something like that as an analogy. Not central but indispensable really in the long run to really have that freedom of, the freedom to fly in soul making practice and the whole range of soul making practice and the whole potential range of soul making practice. Or like an airplane similar, same analogy. You look, oh it needs its engine, it needs its propellers or whatever it are, wings of course, it needs this and that. But maybe there's just one bolt somewhere and it's just a tiny little piece, but if it's missing it's a big deal. Maybe you only notice it when you're trying to do a certain thing, like I don't know, land or turn around or whatever it is. So that kind of thing. You know, the soul making dynamic should be clear to you by now from past teachings. The soul making dynamic will eventually expand because of the way the Europsychological dynamic works. It will expand and it will expand to include within itself, to involve within its dynamic, within its creativity and discovery. It will include to expand every aspect of our being and every aspect of our life. Even more aspects than we even realize exist now. I didn't even know I had that aspect to my being or that aspect to my life. And then it starts to come to be involved, to be in soul, to be involved in the soul making dynamic and it starts to become involved in the soul making dynamic and included in that aspect that comes included. So just so, as the soul making dynamic expands, it should, it wants naturally to start including movement, gesture and voice. And these areas, movement, gesture and voice can also be particular areas where our relationship to them is also, without us even realizing it, a little bit blocked. We're blocking something there. We're holding back something there so the soul making dynamic can actually, doesn't naturally flow in to open them further. It doesn't actually manage to quite reach them and we don't quite realize it. I'm going to expand on this later. So there's a number of reasons why this particular focus, movement, gesture and voice right now. But again, by way of introduction, slightly long introduction, before we get on to the material, I want to say something also about listening and it connects with something I said just now anyway. Often when I'm teaching, I probably go too fast. I speak very quickly and for me it feels like there's a lot to say, a lot to put in a talk because there's so much I want to share and there's so much I want to convey and time is limited in all kinds of ways. But often I'm aware, I go very fast and occasionally a person says to me, well I heard your talks, it's mostly repeat. When I hear a little bit back about what they're thinking and how they're practicing etc, it's clear they've just missed a lot. They're not hearing a lot of details. So I actually think the opposite is true. I'm going too fast rather than I'm just lingering a lot and repeating. What I often don't do is exactly stop and give you an exercise, give you homework, especially if I'm recording like I am now, alone at home. On retreats sometimes slow things down, you can feel what's happening in the room and what's appropriate with what people need there. But often I don't stop and isolate something, extract something and point it out, this is a set of instructions, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, do that and set it up and give it a name and make it a thing. And again it's just not very skillful teaching to expect people to do that. Partly, naively a part of me was expecting that or has been in the past and I think it's naive. So time is still limited, I'm going to try and do exactly that, give you exercises to do etc. But still, when you listen to this, these set of talks, when you listen to talks that have already been given, maybe by me, maybe by another teacher, is it possible to think about listening more actively, that actually there might be a job for you, several jobs for you to do as a listener and one of them might be for you to actively extract meditations, exercises from what's being said. Or would it be to listen to talk, maybe talk you've listened to before and just haven't listened with those kinds of ears on. There's a kind of, I just sit and I kind of hear it and it touches me or I kind of get the ideas or whatever. What would it be to actually put that, the hat of that particular job on? You're actually actively extracting meditations and exercises. Number one. Number two, is it possible to actively extract larger principles? Sometimes these are even less obvious. Of course, sometimes I'll linger a lot on a larger principle and explaining something and why it's important and what the concept is and how it all fits together and even why it's important in our history and all kinds of stuff. But sometimes not or to differing degrees. So what would it be for you as a listener also to listen at times with the hat on, listening to extract larger principles which are sometimes less obvious and they'll be, as I said before, especially less obvious if I don't even bother to explain why we're doing this or that in a certain ritual or a ceremony that we've just made up and maybe we'll just do once. Of course, that's not going to be obvious but there are reasons why we choose to do this or why I said that or why all of it. And so that takes quite a lot of intelligence perhaps to listen that way and try and extract those larger principles. So two possibilities, some for listening at different times, extracting meditation possibilities and exercises. Number one, number two, extracting larger principles which may be more or less explicit. Just like the exercises, I may make a very light suggestion, maybe explicit, I just touch on it so quickly, may just be implicit in what I'm saying. So there's an invitation. You maybe think about doing that sometimes, experiment with that kind of listening. I taught a recent retreat at Guyhouse on the theme of the jhana, jhana practice and one of the things I mentioned there was about inertia and our inertia as practitioners, as students of the dharma but also as human beings. And I would have had there been more time, spent a lot longer really exploring that theme of inertia and really asking people to inquire into where does inertia, how and where and in what ways does inertia operate for them in the way they relate to their practice and the way that they practice and the way that they listen and what they practice and how they practice, all that. To me there's a huge and really, really important inquiry there. But I just mentioned it on the retreat and sort of pulled back from giving people too much to do even though we had three and a half weeks. Still felt like it would be a bit much. But in my mind it felt like actually really, really important. Recently, still on this theme of listening recently, Nick and Sarah were listening to some talks, a set of talks and they were listening together. And as people sometimes do, they decided to whatever decided just spontaneously occurred that they would listen and then they would sort of ask each other, can I press pause for a sec? And they would pause, someone would press pause and they would say okay, press pause and they would just, oh, one person would say, should we just do that practice he just mentioned? And sometimes it was just that I was just implying a practice or just mentioning it. It wasn't only that they pressed it when there was an actual guided meditation. So now I'm going to do a guided meditation. Okay, let's do this. So they were really listening in quite a different way and being together enabled them to listen in that way. They actually got into a kind of mode of listening where they were pressing pause quite a lot or pressing pause to stop and actually discuss something that they just heard or question something or one person didn't quite understand or just questioning that can't be right or whatever. So sometimes a talk, a two hour talk, I have no idea how long it ended up taking them to listen to, but it certainly sounded like they were having a lot of fun doing it that way. Maybe it was more fun. I don't know. Maybe other times of course it's much more fun doing it on your own and listening right through, straight through without interruption. Maybe they were digesting more, assimilating more. So there's a question, but we can have, for instance, active listening modes if we call that active listening as well as receptive listening. I just, it's a differing degree, just letting it kind of come in without interrupting, without turning the soil, stopping to turn the soil. But what is it to till the soil? To till the soul? It will need tilling at some point the soil of the soul and whether that's actually while I'm listening or after or at some point it needs that and that cannot happen without you being active and without you taking some kind of initiative and responsibility and making choices and being intelligent, sort of listening, I think I said on a recent retreat, listening on the tip of your toes or at the edge of your seat, on the tip of your toes, I think I said. Similar goes for reading. You know, some people, unfortunately it's a surprising amount of people sort of make it clear that they read seeing freeze without doing any of the practices or without really doing, without really spending much time at all on any of the practices. To my mind it's like how much can you hope to really get out of it? There's not the working of the soil enough and even reading it just too quickly, it's that particular, there's lots of books, lots of books aren't, but that particular is very dense. There's a lot there. Why that word? What does it mean? What does it imply? What does it suggest about my practice? What suggests about what I'm thinking and how what's being written or said might be a little bit different or even a lot different from what I'm actually thinking. So anyway, just this question about inertia and in this case an inertia about how we practice, also an inertia about how we listen or inertia in regards to how we listen. We get stuck in certain modes of listening, certain modes of reading and it takes a bit of work to push ourselves out of that particular kind of groove or rut basically that we're in. So inertia in physics takes work to overcome, takes force to overcome. Again there can be an inertia regarding what we hear, what we read and where without even realising it we're actually end up hearing and end up reading what we already think we know. I'm actually just chopping off, shaving off, just literally not hearing or seeing what doesn't actually fit into what I think I already know. So I end up just reading something that's in fact quite different, quite challenging to what I already know but I think I've just read something that's completely confirmed here or just just said it in what I already know in different words. So there's all kinds of possibilities here for kind of energising and bringing some oomph and some electricity and some fire and some soul, some morsel really into their listening and reading, all kinds of possibilities. There's also the question, you know, when we're listening and reading about, and this is related to what I've just said, is, you know, we're partly kind of, we can't help listening and reading, I think it's just the way consciousness needs to work, without kind of usually unconsciously having a process where we're determining or trying to determine judging the significance of this or that thing that we're hearing right now. Here's a talk, it's an hour or whatever it is, two hours or whatever, this part's not that significant, that part's significant, or here's something I'm reading, whatever. So this, I think, is just natural to the way we need to listen as human beings to structure, to make sense of what we're listening or what we're reading. What is the significance of this? How much significance does it have? Some of what we're going to get into in this, offering this series of talks, or how long it will end up being, some of these exercises, they will not seem, well they probably will not seem that significant. So I'm going to say that right now, they probably will not seem that significant, it's a bit like that tiny little bone at the bird's shoulder that just connects the wing, one little bone in the wing, instead of little filaments of muscle in the wing, to a small bone or another bone in the chest, whatever it is. It doesn't seem that significant, or that bolt in the airplane. Some of these exercises won't seem that significant. We can tend to think, especially with soul making practice, and imagine practice, well if there's an image, especially if I get a clear image and a clear sense of the image, that's significant. But if I'm just doing something and there's no real moving or gesturing or voice or something, there's no real image, it doesn't seem that, it may not seem that significant. So something can seem to have more impact, and it can certainly seem to be more to the point of, and in line with, what imaginal practice is, obviously if there is an image and we're impacted, it can seem that that's more significant. But in the long run it may not be. Even if I get a sort of wow image, maybe in the long run it was just some wow, and I definitely felt impacted and affected and it was beautiful and everything, but in the long run it may not be that significant. Just the fact that we talk about imaginal practicing, well obviously images must be significant, well it may or may not be, relatively speaking. Sometimes it's hard to really be that wisely discerning in assessing what actually is significant and what is its significance. It's hard, it's hard for us. All this is very normal. I think I remember at some point using the phrase, I can't remember how often or even when it was, it feels like a long time ago using the phrase structural listening. Can we listen to a Dharma talk structurally or read a book, for example seeing the phrase structurally, again very very rare, very rare to have that capacity to kind of listen for the larger structure of ideas and the sort of way it all hangs together and the progress of ideas there, the larger conceptual framework. What would it be to actually develop that capacity as well? That's a training, that's a big deal. So it's very rare. What would it be to listen or read for and from the whole conceptual framework? I'm listening for or reading for to get a sense of what is the whole conceptual framework and then when I think I have that I'm listening from the perspective of the whole conceptual framework and that listening from and understanding the whole conceptual framework, holding it there, it frames my listening. Whether it's soul making Dharma, that conceptual framework, whether it's emptiness or mainstream Dharma, whatever it is, that frames my listening and creates a kind of meta view from which I can then discern with intelligence. I can then discern, it helps me to discern the relative significance and the relative place of this or that thing that I'm hearing, or this or that instruction, or this or that word even that I'm hearing right now or reading right now. This is hard or it's very rare. It's rare for someone to have that as a sort of that's normally the way they go about things. It does exist but it's very rare. It can be trained. Listen, read for and from the whole conceptual framework. In the end it ends up being a lot less work to do things that way because things are ordered. I have, because the very conceptual framework tells me where things will be and informs me about what I might do in practice at any moment. It suggests, it tells me how ideas fit together so they're not just a random sort of here's another idea, here's another idea, here's another one. I've just got this pile of stuff to sort through random sort of objects, all of which, most of which maybe look a little interesting or glistening or kind of curious or whatever, but how, you know, instead of this big structure where they fit together and I can understand where things are etc. Because I understand where things are and how they work I can find them a lot easier. Things make sense, they're more accessible, I can make choices a lot easier, a lot more intuitively eventually and a lot more intelligently, a lot more helpfully. Even just now, up to now, you know, we've thrown out this this idea about inertia and this question is like actually taking on this question, this inquiry, where, where is the inertia for me in relation to dharma practice? How and why practice in relationship to how and what I study or hear or how I listen? Where's the inertia and how does that inertia balance with a need for steadiness? I actually need to stay with something for a while and then I can have, you know, I can get too, too kind of entrenched in something. So this inquiry into inertia. Now I would say that that inquiry into inertia, even though we're not really going into it, but again I'm postponing it or just mentioning it, don't know if I'll ever get back to it, I would actually say that's more important as a teaching, as an inquiry. Structurally it's more important at the meta level, it's more important than anything else that I might say in this set of talks about movement and gesture or anything else. Similar thing on the recent genre trade, you know, talk about all these different techniques and where you can move between this genre and that and how you can, you know, do this and that. Oh, really important stuff, great. What I think was much more important for most people, and if it wasn't during those three and a half weeks, it will be at some point, will have been at some point, much more important than all those little bits of really valuable technique, was the whole relationship with desire, genre practice being a goal-oriented practice. And I need desire because I'm moving towards this, I want to achieve whatever it is, the third genre or whatever, it's what I'm trying for. I have an aim, I need to put in effort and I need desire. And then the whole question, the whole area of questions around difficulties, around complications, around my relationship with desire, my relationship with goals, my relationship with effort, all that comes up. How much stuff there is a much more important in the long run to really be open that up to understand oneself with that, to liberate oneself in relationship to desire, being able to sustain a desire, a deep desire and move towards a goal without getting completely tied up in knots. First of all, it's important because I'm going to need that to do the genre practice as much as I need to hear this little tip or technique from moving between this genre, from moving between this genre and the other. I'm also going to bump in, I can't help but move in the domain of my desires and the difficulties of my desire. So I'm going to need that for genre practice. And it's a subject that's going to pertain to any other practice I do, pretty much, dah-dah perhaps I do, and loads of stuff that's outside of my meditation practice just pertain to my life. So you can just structurally, it's a much, much more important issue, an area of investigation and concern and the possibility of freedom in the broader sense, I mean freedom, than just technique, or this piece of technique. So again, it's even here, I mentioned inertia tonight. Even that, it's just structurally, it's like that's actually more important than anything else, even though these other pieces are, as I said, really important. Okay, so there's a lot here, but I'm just, this is all by way of introduction. A little bit more introduction, let's see if you can stand it. Okay, as I said, I will hopefully unfold more about the why of these exercises, why I am offering them now, why I'm emphasizing them now. And that will, as the talks unfold and the instructions unfold, I hopefully will include, I intend to include more about the why. Just to say right now, of course, the why of these exercises is related to the why of practice in general. It has to be, right? Of course. Why would these exercises be, rather, the why, the larger question of why I'm practicing informs the smaller question of why these exercises, why practice these exercises, why might they be important? So the why of these exercises is related to the bigger why of why, why practice, why am I practicing? It has to be, of course, just think that through if it's not obvious. And that, of course, is intimately related to what we've been calling the fantasy of the path, the fantasy of the goal of the path, the fantasy of awakening, the fantasy of the self of on the path, of fantasies. So the why of these examples, the reasons why we're addressing, focusing, emphasizing, filling them out now, opening them out now, is related to the why of practice and the fantasies of practice, path, awakening, self as practitioner, self on the path. And most of you will have heard me talk about this for emphasis. It's so crucial. This why, why am I practicing? What's my idea of why I'm practicing? And what's my image or fantasy of practice, of path, of where it's leading and of myself on the path? Those ideas and those images and fantasies will always have consequences, major, major consequences, consequences at every level of our dharma practice, actually at every level of our life. Our ideas about why we practice and our fantasies of path, goal, self, awakening, etc. will have massive consequences, certainly in our practice, at every level of our practice, and also beyond our practice in the rest of our life. And one of the questions as, a, do we realize it? Second question is, do we realize that these ideas and fantasies can be, can be limiting? They can also be nonsensical. So we can end up with a sort of conglomerate of ideas and fantasies about the why of practice and what practices and where we're going that actually don't really make sense together. They're not very coherent. They're also limited. That's possible. That's very, very possible. They will always have consequences. The question is, are we, you know, do we want to unlimited them? If they're limited in an unhelpful way, do we want them to be coherent and to make sense if they don't actually make sense? Once we start looking at them and questioning them and prodding them a bit, which often we don't, often practitioners don't really. We've talked about all this before in other talks. There will always be consequences. Have to realize that. I remember teaching in another country, which is quite some years ago now, and I was talking with a woman, um, and I can't remember the context. I don't think it was in an interview. It was either before or after the retreat or some other situation. Like it may have been an interview. I can't remember. Anyway. And she said to me or to a group of us, I can't remember, my husband doesn't need to meditate. She was probably in her late 60s then is my guess. So I could be wrong, but I'm assuming it sounded like actually, her husband was a similar age. My husband doesn't need to meditate and I don't know if she elaborated on that. Um, certainly my ears pricked up at that point. Um, my husband doesn't need to meditate. She may have said something like, or what she then said, made it implied that what she meant is he's already calm. He's already kind of a very steady character and calm or something like that. And of course, implicit in that was her view that calmness and steadiness was the point of, and the goal of meditation. And that's why she was coming to retreat. And that's why her husband didn't need to, because he was already calm and steady. Um, I think that the situation wasn't such that I was, uh, in the teacher role at that point or, or I can't remember the situation exactly, but, um, it didn't seem appropriate for me to, you know, ask a question in response or probe that a little more. But to me, it was very clear that she was holding a very limited idea of what she was there for on retreat, what she hoped to get meditation from meditation, what meditation was for. And this was in fact, born out by other, um, interactions I had with her and things that I saw. Now that's fine. If that's, if that's her view, um, or if that's her, um, thoroughly investigated view and that's where she arrives at freely and independent, this is all I want meditation to be. I know there's this option, that option, that option, that option, that option as well, but I actually just want it to be calm and steady because I've looked at my life and looked at everything else and all the other things, either I can get them elsewhere. I can understand the emptiness of awareness elsewhere, which I like you of course, but, um, or some other kind of freedom I can get, whatever it is. Um, or they're just not things I'm interested in. Okay. But my sense was that she, she hadn't actually thoroughly opened up that inquiry. And so there was this quite small, um, small area delineated for, for, for the sort of the range and the purpose of meditation and retreat and all that. And you could also, as if you could pick that up in other ways in terms of her responses and reactions to teachings that went beyond that. Now it could have been something else. She or someone else could have said it, you know, maybe not calm and steady. They could have replaced it by, oh, he, she, they have so much patience. They don't need to meditate. They're just so patient or they have just, you know, unshakable meta and compassion. They just seem to love everyone and it's just not shakable. Someone can be really difficult or whatever and they just, they're just always kind. They don't need to meditate or they have incredible equanimity. You know, this or that happens and they're just really steady or they're just naturally mindful. You know, I forget this and I forget that or they're just naturally mindful or even, uh, they could, they could say he, she, they, they don't experience a self. I've talked to them and they don't actually experience a self and they only experience this sort of flow of moment or whatever it is that they would explain, etc, etc. It could be anything. We could put anything there. They don't need to meditate because fill it with whatever you want. But compare that to saying something like, um, my husband doesn't need to make art. Doesn't need to make music or if they're, if they're an artist or a musician. Doesn't need, um, if there are scientific research, if we look at some of these other fantasies that we've talked about and the fantasies of the past, they don't need to do scientific research anymore or ever, or, or a fantasy of the lover. They don't need what? They don't need to make love. They don't need to spend time with their beloved. They don't need to expand or let expand, support the expansion of the range of landscapes and soul territories that one moves through and in with one's lover, creates and discovers with one's lover. To compare it to saying something like that, don't need to meditate because they don't need to make art. They don't need to make music. They don't need to do scientific research or any more scientific research or they need to be in love anymore and be in love and do in love and be together in love in relationship anymore. That need, you know, to one who feels the need in the sense of the beauty of those needs. I mean, for some people only really relate to that in love one. I don't know, but for me, certainly a scientific researcher, the artist, the, you know, making music, meaning composing music, etc, improvising music, whatever it is, to one who feels that need, feels the depth of that need and the infinite depth of that need, those needs, and the beauty of those needs, the inexhaustibility of those needs, the mystery of those needs. It's not, those kind of needs are not needs that there is really an end to. Not if you're really called that way. If the soul is called, if the soul is on fire. You don't think, oh, I get to the point where I don't need to, I don't need to do any more scientific research. I don't need to write any more music or whatever it is. I don't need to, etc. They're not, they're not, there's no end to that and you wouldn't want there to be an end to it, because if there's an end to it, something has died and it's not about reaching an end. It's not about achieving calmness or I've just discovered, imagine some, you know, I've just discovered this in physics, great, okay, I think I'm done now, that's all I wanted to know. That's not how that kind of deep curiosity works. What persons have written, you know, I wrote one song, I wrote one piece of music or I had that, you know, that time improvising there, I took a solo, whatever it was and I don't think I need to do it anymore. That's not how it works. It's insatiable. It's bottomless. It's not even ours. It's calling us from a distance that is beyond, that is beyond us. It is not ours and it's ours. It's infinitely far away and it's the most intimate, the most intimate thing. It's not something that there's an end to. It's not something we would want there to be an end to. It comes out of love, out of beauty, out of eros and delight, out of soul, out of curiosity, out of the depths of our being, just as can the intention for meditation practice come out of love, of beauty, of eros, delight, soul, curiosity, depth rather than I want to, you know, be steady like my husband is steady or calmer or whatever, or even I want to experience this thing where I don't have a self and there's just a sort of flow of moments. Why stop there? Why stop there? Gosh, there's so much more than that. I think wonderful as that might be and of course if you're listening to this and you're just, you know, kind of really caught up in dukkha, it seems like it has no nothing but dukkha, of course we're going to want the calmness and I've been, we've talked about this before. Once you've reached, let's see even that place where it's just, there's just this kind of open self or there's just an open sense of awareness and I'll put this in strong inverted commas, no self. Why stop there? Why stop there? Honestly it would be like Einstein saying I've done my special theory of relativity, I think I'll stop there. Or Beethoven saying yeah I wrote my second symphony, I think that's it now. It doesn't make sense, we're talking about allowing a desire to come from a different place, recognising that a desire comes from a different place. And this very much has to do again with who we are as human beings. It's mine and it's not mine, it comes from an infinite distance, an infinite beyond and it's the most intimate thing. And it's beautiful, the desire itself is beautiful so we wouldn't want it to end. And yes, along with that very desire, it brings difficulties, it brings frustrations, exasperations, challenges, we feel we're stuck at different points, it burns, it hurts, there's disappointment, there's all that along with the beauty and the joys and the gifts and the creationist discoveries of it all. So the why of these exercises is related to the why, why am I practicing has to be related to that in the larger sense and that is related to my fantasy of the self and the path. All of this is tied together. What ideas, what images do I have that are operating? How helpful are they, how limiting are they, how much sense do they even make? How coherent are they? They will have consequences. Even sometimes, you know, other very different situation, I remember talking to other people and being in very different Dharma backgrounds and this woman I described who had been kind of basically also, to be fair, trained in from the beginning a presentation of the Dharma that didn't actually present the Dharma as much more than that. So that's what she had been taught the Dharma was and, you know, anyway, so she was trained in that. Very different Dharma scene, thinking of different teachings, you know, sometimes people get into, again, certain ideas about what they're doing, certain fantasies, the idea because obviously the Dharma has to do with liberation and freedom and therefore it has to do with not struggling. And if we're into something called non-duality, then just drop the struggle right now and don't struggle in meditation, don't struggle at all, don't even struggle to stay awake, don't struggle, just don't struggle. Or, you know, that idea together with the idea and it often goes with sort of, I would say, narrow ideas of non-duality. You know, don't deal with concepts, just don't be conceptual, just drop the whole conceptual thing. It's a lot more easy, simpler, less struggle, more spiritual because non-conceptuality and spirituality go together, right? All these kind of things. And then out of that comes a kind of mode of practicing, effectively a technique, although one tries to think of it as not a technique because one isn't struggling or supposedly not struggling and doing and not thinking, etc, etc, and it's non-dual. And the idea is that it's open, but actually ends up being very closed because we've cut off a bunch of possibilities. No struggling in any way at all, no thinking. You have to think, we have to conceive, the only little bit of conceiving around is that conceiving isn't allowed and try and be non-dualistic, etc, whatever that means. But what that also means, if we link it to other fantasies, is that there can be very little art because there's very little doing. There's a shrinking of options. There's a shrinking of the possibilities for creation and discovery. It's not this infinite range and expanding sort of playground of creation, discovery of artistic possibilities. Practice just ends up being almost like one thing in this all this kind of rhetoric and convincing ideas and images about openness and liberation, etc, actually ends up being quite narrow, just actually doing the same thing over and over. And it's one thing and it's not really leading anywhere except for the same thing over and over. So what's supposed to be open ends up being actually quite closed, or closing possibilities, closing the possibility of art in the larger sense there. When we come to soul-making, darling, you know we've said this and we've emphasized that we could we could pick other other other dharma areas, emptiness, whatever, it should just say soul-making dharma, you know, it requires so much by way of bases, of stepping stones, of prerequisites, preliminaries. It's so sophisticated and subtle, it's so wide and so deep, excuse me, so many dimensions and aspects of our being, excuse me, are involved and demanded, demands are made from them and a lot of sophistication, subtlety and ability and facility in all these different areas. One could say it's pretty elitist and actually I would agree, I think it is elitist in that sense, I'm not sure what the etymology of elitist is but probably has to do with choosing, but anyway it is elitist in the sense that probably, well let's say it the other way around. I think that picking up music and energy a little bit, maybe a better image, maybe a better way of thinking about what we're doing, let's say when we're teaching soul-making dharma practice, we could actually even teach a dharma practice or whatever, is a better way of thinking about it, rather than the usual ways we practice. This is to do with liberation from suffering, this is to do with at least reducing suffering and as such as a teaching about the reduction of suffering, reduction of stress, it's for everyone and available to everyone and therefore we want teachings that anyone can apply, anyone can understand and it's really important that they're accessible in that way. So there's a kind of legacy we get from the foreknowable truth which is that this is basically, this is for reducing suffering, if we kind of water it down a little bit and just say reducing suffering. There's a legacy we get from that, of course it's a wonderful legacy we get from the foreknowable truth, so rich and so brilliant as a teaching and so powerful as a teaching, I've talked about that lots before but it's actually a mixed blessing, this legacy, it has a shadow side and I've talked about that as well and particularly as a shadow side when in this day and age we start to actually question what does a reduction suffering actually mean and what does it look like and how noticeable is it at different levels. When we've kind of done away with the universality of a, or there is no more a universality of belief in that the end of suffering is the ending of rebirth and what exactly do we mean by ending suffering? I've been into that all that before but with all that and we still want to, despite the massive confusion there, what actually do we mean by the third noble truth and by implication the first noble truth and then of course the second and fourth but principally the first and the third. What do we mean by suffering? What do we mean by ending suffering? In the kind of swamp of confusion that has come with that in the aftermath of this kind of dropping of a universality of what that looks like, whether it's a terra vada universality or mayana universality or whatever and then coupled with that because it's reducing suffering it somehow needs to apply to everyone, it needs to be equally applicable to everyone and accessible and everything. So that model, it brings with it all kinds of issues and problems and kind of it brings with it its own its own sort of stumbling blocks and limitations. Sometimes, more recently, I'm thinking well why not just conceive the whole thing like music school or art school and we teach all levels at this music school or art school and from beginners never done any, never even put my lips to a recorder or whatever it is, never even banged on a drum with my fingers, whatever it is, sugar rattle. We teach all levels but we understand and we teach right from that beginner level all the way, you know, just there's no end to it in fact, there's no end to where we stop where we stop that. We can just keep going in this music school but we understand only some of the people who will want to take up music and come and learn and play and develop and practice etc. Only some of them will have a really deep desire or that really deep desire to just play at the highest, deepest, freest levels. Of course, only some people have, in that sense it's elitist, it's up to you. So if elite is etymology related to elect and choose, it's your choice, your choice how far you want to go. Everyone will be challenged by something or in relation to something within that whole range of what's possible there and practice and development but it's your choice and your choice about what you desire and how far you want to go and how much you want to develop things. So that would be an example of, you know, just say yes it's elitist, no problem, what's the problem of being elitist? It's elitist in the same way that music school is elitist, it's not refusing any one entry, it's just saying well yeah but if you want to do that then you need to do this first because otherwise you won't be able to do that. But we can teach you this and after you do that then yeah then let's talk about the other thing if that's what you really want. So sometimes one more reason I just thought it's a much better model but we're hampered a little bit and tied to this, we just keep thinking about words like liberation and ending suffering or reducing suffering and then there's all kinds of other accretions that go with that particularly around non-elitism and accessibility and it's for everyone all this stuff. It might just be simpler to change the analogy. Okay so I want to extend the, this is also an introduction by the way, I want to extend the analogy, the musical analogy, it gets a little limited here but just rather extend one thread of the music analogy. So there's limitations you know to any analogy and it'll be clear here but I think it's useful. So I'm going to speak about music because obviously that's something I have, as you know, something I have a history with so I know that whole area. You know sometimes, so I was a different kind of musician at different times, I was a composer but before that I was a jazz musician and I studied jazz and worked to develop my the art of improvising on the guitar in sort of different jazz idioms and something that I was completely dedicated to and put enormous amount of energy into. And so I'll use that as an example and you know sometimes what happens is what you've got there and let's say learning to improvise jazz guitar is you've got a lot of different skills and arts within one thing, learning to improvise jazz guitar, improvising jazz guitar, it's a lot of different skills and arts, not one thing, it's many many. And again it's just open-ended and it's infinite in the possibilities there. And sometimes what happens if you really get into all this stuff and give yourself to it, there's sometimes there's a sort of sudden growth of ability, like of what you can do, what you can play or create or improvise, and you're not even quite sure how that sudden jump of level happened. Of course it comes out of love, it comes out of loving what you're doing and loving that whole area and loving the music and it comes out of listening and listening with love and listening with eros, you know, to other musicians and music you love. It comes of course out of playing and it comes definitely out of practicing. So it comes out of all those four things but it's not necessarily the case sometimes, it's not necessarily the case that I practiced x and then I was able to do x. Of course sometimes it is, I practice x and then eventually I was able to do it. Great, so now I can do x, it's added to my playground, it's added to my freedom that I have to create and discover musically in the moment. But other times I don't practice x. So sometimes I don't practice x and I'm somehow able to do x. By some way I don't even understand how it happened. Probably more often than not I don't practice x and then I'm never able to do x, whatever x is. It will never appear in my playing, it will never appear in my creating, discovering, my improvisation etc. Because I never practiced it. So I could talk a lot about this but I want to keep it short. If I had to, you know, I'm looking at death now and look back at my life and think and realize, you know, there's one grief I think. I think there's one grief, you know, obviously been in and out of lots of different relationships and situations and all kinds of things. And for me there's one grief in my soul that I think I will take with me to my grave. And it feels like a deep soul grief. And that is specifically around, how can I say this, not developing certain things in jazz guitar and my ability to do certain things to a level that I would have liked. A level of virtuosity and fluidity specifically that I would have liked. So specifically it's about technique actually. I don't know, maybe that sounds very weird to some people to look back at that life and think that's a strange thing to have grief about. I don't know. But to me that's what it is. And as I said, as far as I can tell, it's the one thing and it goes very deep. For me it's a real soul grief. And in a way there's a story behind that. I mean I did develop all kinds of abilities on jazz guitar. Some very sort of rare abilities I would say and abilities to do things that are really quite rare. Other things that were maybe less rare or more sort of obvious seeming. I never got the chance to develop. And the reason I never got the chance to develop was partly, well mostly because they weren't taught. There was no one at that time, there is now, how many years later, 30 years later or more, more than 30 years later. There is now people teaching electric guitar technique with a plectrum with a pick. But back in those days it wasn't really taught. So I went to music conservatories and colleges and no one could teach that. They could teach it for every other instrument. Because all those other instruments had hundreds of years of history behind them for people to figure out how do you teach piano techniques so that people can be very fluid and fly that way. But on the guitar it seemed like no one really, if they could do that, they didn't really know how they figured out. It's sort of something they just stumbled across and they didn't even realize quite what they were doing. They'd never put it under a microscope, it just worked so they went with it. But a lot of people didn't, couldn't actually do that stuff really to the level I'm talking about. So I wasn't alone in this boat and I had to kind of make do with what I could do and kind of work around my inabilities, my in capacities. And I feel really good about that. But there's a grief here. You know, and it has to do with just again this deep unfathomably deep visceral desire, calling, vocation for music to come through, which was then not physically, not able, not enabled to be fully physically manifest. I'm going to say that again because this is really, I'm not just telling a story here, this is really key to what I'm talking about in all these talks. It was not enabled to become fully physically manifest, not enabled to become fully physically manifest. There was, it was never explained to me. I couldn't find anyone to explain to teach me those things, which on other instruments would be completely basic, completely like, well, this is just part of how you learn the instrument, exercises, etc. So there's a grief for me there. It's too late to go back. And I eventually gave up the guitar, got more into composing, partly because of that, because I felt the limitations partly, and more into compose, eventually gave up that and became a Dharma teacher. So who knows, had I got, you know, had I had available to me that enabling and that teaching of that technique and was enabled to fully physically manifest that degree of musical creation in improvisation. Maybe I wouldn't have taken those other steps and I wouldn't be giving this talk today, I wouldn't be a Dharma teacher, but that's also been very wonderful, of course, I know you know that. And I feel very much, that's of course part of my calling too. Anyway, the point here, actually there's lots relevant here, but for this talk, there's one main reason for sharing this. And it's about this exercises that allow something to become fully physically manifest, that enable that possibility, those possibilities. So just as there are lots of, as I said, lots of elements or techniques and capacities and abilities that go together to make up, you know, being an improvising jazz guitarist, there are many that go to make up Dharma practice. There's lots in there and there's lots even that go to make up soul making Dharma practice. So when we come to soul making Dharma practice, when we come to wanting to live a life of soul, we can hope, you know, that just, well, I'll just practice and I'll just love all this soul making business and I'll listen to the talks and I love them for the most part and I play and I meet with friends and we play soul making together and all that stuff. And it may be, or I can hope that it opens possibilities and it will open possibilities. But the question is, will it leave some possibilities not opened to me, to my practice, to my soul making Dharma practice, but also to my life and my life in soul and my soul in life? So we can hope and maybe it will to a certain extent, but maybe not. And we talk about exercises and techniques, they're not everything. So some people be musicians, you know, you're playing a scale, it's not really music yet, you know. And some of these things we're going to talk about, they're not necessarily even soul making. I mean, they might be. Excuse me. But like that bone in the wing of the bird or near the wing of the bird, or like just the ability to do certain things, they're crucial, they're absolutely crucial. They're not everything, but they're necessary for music, they're necessary for the fullness of soul. Fullness of soul making, formal practice and the fullness of soul making in one's life and soul in one's life and soul through one's life and life in soul. So what I want to offer, okay, that's the end of the introduction. What I want to offer is five exercises. And exercises means they're full practice, which means in this sense, like doing technical exercises on the piano or whatever it is, or the scale, the point is repeating them, maybe gaining facility through the repetition. Not just something to do maybe once or twice, but actually doing them until you really don't need to do them anymore. They're not necessarily soul making, as we just said, they won't necessarily, these exercises, bring a kind of sense of a wow experience or some kind of dramatic shift in anything. Suddenly I was doing this thing and this exercise and following the recording and suddenly there was a shift. They won't necessarily mind, but they won't necessarily do that. So five exercises, there's no prescribed order, I don't think, between these five. But as I'm regarding this preliminaries, in a way you can get a sense of what I mean by that. So even if you're well into soul making, down practice by now, there will still be good to add, I think, and to explore. No prescribed order, and they form part of what we might call a set of preliminaries, or might hopefully, again, develop into a set of preliminaries and talk about other ones more later on. And so I want to explain more about the why as we go through. Okay, so five exercises, no prescribed order. Well, I need to choose to start. So I'll start with one, which I'll call exercise number one, but not because it's really number one, which is calling, and it's a movement exercise. Okay, and so all of them have movement, gesture, and voice, and some of them are a lot more complex. So this starts relatively simple, relatively simply. Okay, exercise number one. And now, immediately you're going to hear, there's lots of variations possible. So there's five exercises, but lots of variations within each exercise, because this exercise can be done in two ways. Okay, it can be done as an actual physical movement. Your actual physical body is moving, and someone else in the room can see that you're moving. Or it can be done just with the energy body and the imagination, and there's no physical movement. Okay, so all the different variations within this exercise, number one, can be done either physically or just in the energy body and the imagination without the physical movement. Between these two possibilities, physical body or just energy body, there isn't an order. I don't think there's an order. Try different, you know, if you're going to do these, you know, a number of times at least, I hope then, experiment with different orders. First the physical, and then not, and then the other way around, you know. Okay, so two large camps with physical and just the energy body. Also then, starting in four postures. So already we've got eight variations, right? We haven't actually started yet. So four postures, sitting, standing, walking and lying down. The four classic postures of the Satyakta and Asutta. So that already leads to eight, and then the actual parts of the exercise, we're going to say there's five. Actually even more, but you can see, just already proliferating variations. So it could just in the energy body, standing, okay, and then, or physical movement, starting in the walking posture. Okay, they're different variations of these different, different kind of categories of choice, if you like. Okay, so one category, whether it's physical, whether it's just energy body, the second category, which of the four postures you're going to start. Well, let's take, as an example, let's say you start standing. Okay, then there's five parts of the exercise, okay. First one is you adopt your starting posture and you feel the energy body. So let's say it's standing. You adopt the standing posture and you feel your energy body in that posture. And then you feel, or imagine, the energy body extending to fill the room that you're in, so that it touches the walls. Okay, and this isn't something we would always want to do with the energy body at all. Usually we talk about energy body just a little bit bigger than the physical body, but here, you're with your primarily kinesthetic imagination, you're feeling, imagining your energy body extending to fill the room and touch the walls of the room and the ceiling and the floor, etc. And what does that feel like? Maybe there's some visuals to it, but primarily you want it kinesthetic. Okay, so that's the first thing. You're just standing and you're imagining doing that. Second, so this is the second of five options, you begin to move. So you have to really take your time working through these. We really want the experience, the sense, the intention here, I'll repeat this at the end, the intention here is sensitivity to the energy body, and in this case also, and the projected or expanded energy body and the space you're in. So really feeling sensitivity to the energy body, sensitivity to the expanded energy body and the kind of inhabiting or filling of the space you're in. That's the intention. It's primarily about sensitivity. Okay, so you've adopted the starting posture, you've expanded and you're feeling that, you've extended the energy body and you're feeling that. Second, you start moving your hands and your wrists and your arms slowly, just in an improvised way. Move your hands and wrists and arms any way you want and feel your energy body and feel and again sense, imagine the, so to speak, imagine the space, as if like you're pushing water or air, which you're doing as you move, you're pushing the air or the energy in the room. Or just imagine you're standing in a swimming pool or floating in a swimming pool and you're alone in the swimming pool and just the movement of your arms is going to send ripples out. The movement of the body will just automatically send ripples out through the space, through the water there in the pool and they will reach the sides and then they will bounce off etc. So what is it? We're not just talking about the space of awareness, we're not just talking about expanding the space of awareness, okay, that's a different practice. We're talking about energy body sense, expanding, moving and feeling, sensing and imagining the, not just the space of the energy body in its usual size, but also the extended sense of the energy in the room and how that's connected with and impacted by and filled by the energy of your body movements. Okay, so it's more than just the space of awareness, we're talking about energy body sensitivity here. Of course the awareness must extend, if we're going to do this exercise, from for example the palms of my hands to the walls. So actually I first have to have that much expansion of the awareness, but that's, we're saying more than that, then it's this sense, imagination, felt kinesthetic sense of energy through the movement, in the movement, with the movement, initiated by the movement, propped up by the movement, occupying, filling the whole space. Okay, so it's just the second part, this is your hands, your wrists and your arms. Remember this can be done physically, can be done just in the imagination with the energy body, there's no obvious physical movement there, could be done from the standing posture, could be done from the lying down posture, from the sitting posture, doesn't, you know, there's all these variations. Okay, okay, you've spent some time doing that. A third, a third stage is to then move your head and neck. Okay, um, now you could stop moving your hands and arms and wrists and just move your head and neck, but the same thing, the same awareness, the same sensitivity, the same expansion, the same kinesthetic sense and imagination and feeling extending there. Or you could make it kind of cumulative, so now you're moving your hands and wrists and arms and your head and neck freely improvise, improvisingly. Same thing, sensitivity, the imagination, the projection, the inhabiting, the filling of the space. And then fourth stage, to add your legs, your feet, your ankles, they can start moving slowly, improvisatedly. Again, that could be everything else becomes still and you just move them, or you add that to the other areas of the body that are already moving. Okay, and then a last stage, and improvise movement including all the whole body, all the body, so the hips, the pelvis, everything. Okay, lots of variations in there, lots of possibilities in there. The intention is the sensitivity to the energy body in the, in the usual size sense, but also to the much more projected, the larger size, the projected expanded energy body and the whole sense, if you like, of the space that you're in and of inhabiting and filling that space with the energy body, letting the energy body project to fill that space. Yeah. And another variation is that actually we can, we can do the same thing with faster movements. Okay, so probably start it slower, because you're going to have, there's much more chance of the sensitivity, and this really does take a lot of sensitivity. This is the prime intention of this exercise. Actually, a lot of these exercises, the sensitivity. Actually, not all of them, but this, for this one. And, and actually the capacity to expand, the capacity to project and not always be held back. I'll talk more about this later. But when you've done this a little, a little while, then when you've done this a few times, then you may want to experiment with faster movements. And it may well be that doing it faster is much more tricky to maintain and really tune in and feel and have a good kinesthetic sense or imagination there. But see, see what happens. And if it's too fast, then you need to slow it down till you can find what does work. Or maybe just keep, just stay with the fast a little longer, because maybe it will come alive. Okay, so that's the first exercise. You can see lots of different variations there. I'm not going to repeat that because you can just rewind and listen to it again. Okay, second exercise also, I mean, I realize there's lots of variations, but actually, relatively speaking, it's, it's, it's pretty simple. And it gets maybe a little more involved later on in the exercise. And second exercise is a voice exercise. So the first one is really movement, you can say the second one is a voice exercise. Again, broadly speaking, we can do it two ways. We can do this voicing, making an actual sound that's audible to ourselves and to others. Or we can do it only imagining making a sound and, and feeling that in the energy body. So with image and energy body sense, there's not a physical sound. And neither is there physical movement here. So two ways of doing it again, and two ways of doing each, each, any element of it. And what we're going to do here is you're going to make, you're going to sound extended tones, extended notes, and the vowels probably or syllables, or maybe they may be the magic syllables. In this exercise, it doesn't matter which, you know, doesn't actually matter that much which sound or if it's a magic syllable, which one it doesn't, it doesn't matter for this purpose, for these purposes at all. To make an extent, you hold a note for a long time. And, you know, not, not till you're out of breath, but just the idea is long notes. And within that, you, you, you have notes at different times, higher notes or lower notes. Excuse me. So use your whole range, use your full range. However high you can go, however low you can go. It's not directly to do with stretching that range, but eventually it may be connected with that. But use your full range without being uncomfortable, high and low. First thing to notice is where in the body is the center of emanation of this sound that you're making right now? Can you notice and feel? At the same time as you're, again, let's say you're standing there doing this, you're, you're still feeling your whole energy body as we do pretty much any practice, feeling the whole energy body as at least a background. You've still got there that whole energy body awareness. But where in the body is the center of the emanation of the sound? Can you notice and can you feel that? So any, any trained singer at least will, anyway, singers really should be aware of this. Different pictures will feel like they're coming from different places in the body. Very high pitch comes from actually higher in the body. It feels like it does, the top of the head, right from the top of the head to the pelvic bone is the usual place where a singer will feel or someone voicing will feel is the sort of center of resonance, the center of emanation of the sound. So the first thing is can you just notice and feel where it's coming from? Within that range from the top of your head, the crown of your head to, to your pelvic bone, right down to your perineum. You've got the whole energy body awareness and then you notice where the center is. Then actually can, can you, is it possible to include the arms and legs and the possibility that the sound may or can you feel it? Just a question. Can you feel it as also emanating from your arms and legs as well? Can it come from the whole energy body? Again, usually energy body is bigger than physical body a little bit. Do you notice that it's easier to feel and to sound from certain places than others? Actually not so much hit the note, but actually to feel the center of emanation and be comfortable with it. Really emanating strongly and surely and full-bloodedly and embodiedly from that center. So over time you might notice it's kind of like the lower belly. It's hard for me to really inhabit that and fill it out and let that really be a center. Something's, I don't know, blocked is it or just not available there or don't know what it is. Okay, I don't have to figure it out, but just to notice. Whereas something up in the throat is much more possible or higher note other people the other way around. So notice and maybe over time with practice it might be that they become, the whole range becomes more evenly available. That the sound that you're sounding, that the body is sounding can emanate full-bloodedly, full-bodiedly, with full presence and full oomph from any place in the body and you're comfortable. It doesn't feel like somehow it's a bit of a dead spot or it's hard to get a feeling there or whatever. Okay, so that's the first part of this second exercise, five parts. Where in the body is a center of emanation of the sound? Actually, I've already mentioned the second one, which is, can I have the sense of the whole energy body emanating? Again, this is something I'm almost certain I've thrown out at different times. I'm pretty sure I encouraged it in the instructions when we're doing the hearing all sounds as mantra when we're doing that guided meditation. I think, where's your voice coming from? It's coming from my mouth and my throat, right? But actually, what is it to really feel? Let yourself imagine it at first, but to have a kinesthetic imagination, a felt sense of the whole energy body, which again means a little bit bigger than the physical body, the whole energy body emanating that sound. It's really coming from that whole space. Okay, so that's the second part of the exercise. Third part of the exercise, can the sound that you're making and the sense of the energy body feel like they're mixed together, to quote from the Buddha, like water in milk? So they're not exactly the same thing, but once you mix them together, it becomes almost impossible to tell them apart. They're not going to separate like oil and water. Can you sense, get a kinesthetic sense and an aural sense as well, of the sound and the energy body mixed together, almost hard to tell, almost impossible to kind of separate them apart. They almost become palpably the same thing. The sound is the energy body, is vibration. The vibration is the sound. The energy body is sound, has become sound, has become vibration. Okay, fourth part of the exercise. We've got this awareness of the energy body as usual, and we've got the awareness of the sound of course. And to add to it, similar to the first exercise, a sense of the space around you and the waves in the pool, the ripples in the pool around you. And actually sound is, in fact, waves in the air. That's what actually makes sound. It's sound is waves in air. What is it? To have the energy body awareness, to have the awareness of the sound, to be really in that, open to that, sensitive to that. And then also open the awareness to the sense of the space around, the sense of the medium if you like. And imagine, feel here, that medium resonating with the sound, filled with the sound. That sound, that energy that you are sounding, that's coming through you, is filling the space, is reaching the walls. Can you get a kinesthetic felt sense, a kinesthetic imaginative sense, hearing it and feeling it as reaching the walls, the ceiling, the floor, etc., filling the space. Okay, I'm just going to say, oh, well I need to get louder, not necessarily. So here's a little sub-variation. Some, actually, let's not say some people, sometimes it's good. Get loud, let yourself get loud, because sometimes that's also, this is very related to one of the reasons why I'm doing this, sometimes some people really hold themselves back from being loud. There's a whole lot of return to this. So sometimes let yourself get loud, as part of filling the space. But you can also have this sense of filling the space, of projecting with the energy body and the sound, and letting it feel, and letting it feel, and impact and shape and flow through and penetrate the medium, when you're not necessarily getting louder. Even in a big room, and it still feels like you're imagining even that it's projecting, you're feeling it as projecting and filling the room. So, that was actually, again, this is the fifth variation. Sometimes you do it loud, and sometimes you do it soft. Okay? So, I've run through because I elided some of them together. So, the first part is, remember all this can be with sound, or just with the imagination and the energy body. Extended tones, doesn't matter what. High and low pitches, different pitches over your whole range. First part, where in the body is the center of the emanation of the sound? Can you notice that? Can you feel it? Whole tip of head to pelvis, and then actually include more and see where is it easier? And what happens over time to that sense of where it's easier to have that sense of the center of the emanation? Second part, can you have a felt sense of felt imagination of the whole body emanating? The whole body radiating sound that way. Third part, can the sound and the energy body become mixed? The vibration, the resonance, and the energy body become mixed like water and milk, like milk and water. Fourth part, with the energy body and the sound awareness, the energy body and the awareness of sound. Can we also feel, imagine, hear, get a kinesthetic, an aural sense of the whole medium of the space that we're in, and the whole space that we're in resonant with that sound, filled with, filling that space with sound and energy, reaching the walls, etc. And fifth, can we do that both loudly and softly, but it still fills, expands, radiates? So I'm going to stop there now and introduce and go through the other exercises in another part. And so these are relatively simple, but still I think really worth doing, and they may sound completely boring or pointless to you. Hopefully I'll explain more about why, why they're important. But I hope that's clear enough for now. We'll stop there. Okay. Please consider supporting DharmaSeed with a year-end gift. Your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all. Visit DharmaSeed.org-slash-donate to learn more. And thanks.

 So tonight I'd like to offer to share just a few reflections on death and dying. I suppose in our culture, primarily if people are going to breach the subject of death, talk about it, there are a few kind of primary or most popular directions through which they approach the subject. And one is of course just the fact of impermanence, the fact that we, our lives, like everything else, is impermanent. And that awareness or the primacy of that awareness is really spread throughout the culture, I would say. Somewhere other than I've said before, you know, it seems to me it's the dominant theme in modern poetry, certain modern English poetry. Some way or another have to do with the poignancy of impermanence, the tragedy of temporal finitude, the ending of things, the fragility of things, the loss, the poignancy and heartache of separation and loss, and the need to acknowledge that this is part of life, this is what we will meet, this is what we will face, our own and others' death. Of course, the cherry blossoms falling from the trees. So there's, in the dominance of that theme in a lot of modern poetry, modern English language poetry, there's a lot wrapped up there. There's a sort of gentle encouragement to open to it, but there's also basically a whole metaphysical stance about what's important, about what's real, about what's perhaps the only thing that's really real, about what it means to live life truly, openly, with an open heart, with open eyes. So of course that's huge, you know, can we open the heart to that, can we bear that poignancy, loss, separation from those we love? And sometimes, whether it's in poetry or whether it's in the Dharma, you know, this emphasis on impermanence can have, as I sort of alluded to just now, a whole other level which is really a metaphysical level and a metaphysical stance and assumption of what the Buddha would call nihilism, what the Buddha would call annihilationism, and criticise it very strongly together with its opposite pole of eternalism, criticising both very strongly as extreme views to be rejected and avoided. The idea that everything ends in death, that we disappear in death, that there's nothing left, and it's a contrasting pair view that the soul just goes on forever, lasts forever in time. But often, nowadays, even in the Dharma, there is this kind of undergirding of this, in the drawing attention to the impermanence and the poignancy of loss or separation, it's undergirded again, either explicitly or implicitly by a whole metaphysic, and a whole metaphysical assumption and position is taken as truth, which is basically what the Buddha called nihilism, annihilationism. And that's the end. There's a complete erasing of our existence. You can say, yes, well, the atoms that make up our body will be recycled, etc., etc. Whatever actions, speech we've done will somehow ripple out onwards in time. But basically, there's a soil underneath there, a whole layer of sediment better of nihilism. But anyway, impermanence, one way or another, or in both ways, is one of the main, or most popular, understandably, sort of directions with which to open up and approach the conversation about death. Another is, much more in the wider culture, less in the Dharma culture, of course, is a kind of eternalism. So, rooted in teachings about heaven and hell and existing forever in heaven and hell, maybe with some intermediate or other sort of provisional stopping over places like purgatory, where you get purified before going to heaven, where you'll stay forever, or you'll stay forever in hell until, etc., etc. And that's a kind of eternalism. Not so popular these days in widespread culture, but still, I think, quite popular is the notion and belief in some kind of afterlife which lasts forever. And what has become fairly widespread, quite widespread, is that in this afterlife, which lasts forever, there is a reunion with one's family. And so, again, just tracing that historically, its beginnings can be traced in the 18th and 19th century. Someone called, someone called Lewis wrote a sort of picture of life in Virginia, in the USA at the time of Jefferson, Thomas Jefferson. And this was one of the things that was beginning to emerge then. So, less this idea of heaven and hell, and more emerging this idea of an afterlife that sort of the hell bit was dropped. And so, the worst of all possible fates, hell burning in hell forever, that was sort of shorn off things. And what was left was, for many people, this idea that after death we are reunited with our loved ones, with family. And this is still very popular, of course, there are probably quite a few people who that very idea of being reunited with one's family is forever, is exactly a version of hell. It's all dependent, of course, but just tracing ideas is an idea of an afterlife, immortality somewhere, that's part of the sort of, again, quite common themes or tropes or approaches to the question of death. And then, of course, a third one in Buddhist circles will be reincarnation or more usually rebirth in Buddhist circles. And I've said this before, in the Pali Canon view, you know, rebirth, the whole teaching of rebirth was mostly terrifying. The idea of just literally endless, forever in time, just being reborn, getting ill, dying again, going through all the misery of people around, people you love dying, and just repeating that over and over again. Maybe in more or less favorable rebirths and some of them, a lot of the levels of rebirth, pretty miserable. Pretty miserable, not the level of comfort and ease and medical security that we have these days for the most part in the West. So the whole teachings about samsara and endless rebirth was essentially terrifying. If you were really, really lucky, or rather if you had played your cards right, which you didn't actually know whether you had done in the past, somewhere in my infinite number of past lives, I may have been a really devoted meditator and exceptionally altruistic and maybe at some point that will burn me a rebirth in a high heaven for a while until I die from there and then I'm on the roulette wheel again. So the whole teaching of samsara and rebirth in that sense was actually terrifying. Nowadays, most Westerners are used to, most Western Buddhists are, you know, it's a certain demographic even within Western society, Western Buddhism, and most of us are used to relatively comfortable lives, relative security regarding getting ill and even if we do get ill is pretty good care, pretty good, etc. So the whole idea of rebirth is like, oh great, we get another chance, or oh, it goes on for more, or I wonder what I'll be next time, or maybe we'll meet again, or that kind of thing. So it's quite, it's got quite a different flavor to it and sort of the assumption, assumptions behind it give it some tenor that's quite different than it probably had in Pali-cannon Buddhism when the Buddha was teaching, get off that wheel and rebirth. Can you not see just this infinite roulette wheel around and round and round, birth and misery and death, birth and loss and death, birth and brief happiness and death and illness and sickness and old age and infirmity and loss and separation, is it get off the wheel? Really staring at that infinitely, infinite number was just horrifying. So it's got quite a different tenor and tone in, most of us picked up with quite a different tone and flavor in sort of modern Western notion of it among Buddhists and among non-Buddhists. Anyway, that would be obviously another kind of typical or common way of approaching it, certainly within Buddhist teachings, approaching the question of death, but I don't want to really approach via any of those angles tonight. There's also another possible approach which is, for instance, some of you will be familiar with some ideas and recent discoveries and theories in quantum physics, for example. And I talked about this in some other talk fairly recently, but I just can't remember what it was. There's something called quantum entanglement, which some of you know what that is. It's when two subatomic particles, for instance, two photons or, it could be anything, become entangled, which essentially means that they're connected to each other. And perhaps if, for example, if one has a certain kind of quality, for example, what they call spin, doesn't matter what that means, let's just say spin and up spin, then the other one will have a down spin. And they're entangled in that way. But what entangled really means, or the more fuller implication, what it means is that when something happens to this particle, it also affects what happens to its entangled partner, its partner particle. And it happens instantaneously, even over massive distances. In other words, it's not like this partner photon signals something to that partner photon, it just seems to happen instantaneously. This was an idea that came up in, actually it was Einstein that uncovered it as an implication and just said, this is ridiculous. How could it be that two things were wrapped up in it, two things were wrapped up? The first thing that came up in it was that you could have this instantaneous communication over vast distances. In other words, that information or a signal seemed to be travelling faster than the speed of light, which for Einstein was completely, for his theories, was completely axiomatically taboo. And secondly, wrapped up with this, we need to explain why, is that it also meant this thing that we've been emphasising many times over the years, that the object, the photon, doesn't exist as having this spin or that spin, this property or that property, until we observe it. So there's two implications wrapped up in it, that an object, a subatomic particle, its thingness is not a defined thing before we observe it. So again, it's not just that we don't know what it is, it is a defined thing, but we have no way of knowing what that defined thing is. It's actually not a defined thing. It's fuzzy, it's indeterminate, it's indefinite, it's not a thing as we call a thing, it's not a real thing. And secondly, that there's this possibility of an instantaneous connection between, you know, over potentially billions of miles, billions and billions of miles, light years and light years. And so this idea came up, Einstein pointed it out and Niels Bohr said, yes, that's actually right. And we're going to call that quantum entanglement, that is a prediction out of the theory and Einstein said, well, that's ridiculous for both of these reasons that he explained, that I've just gone into. So there was a debate about it. And then Einstein proposed together with two other guys called Podolsky and Rosen, two other physicists wrote a paper in the 1930s, I think it was, and suggested that, in a very clever argument, that suggested that this was actually the downfall of quantum physics. It actually proved that things could not be fuzzy before they're observed. They could not be dependent on the observer on the way of looking. Things are things independent of the way of looking. There's a very smart paper, but there was nothing really anyone could do with it because they proposed an experiment which would decide it. Or was it later, it was a physicist called David Bell, an Irish physicist David Bell later at some point, a crazy experiment. I can't remember the exact history. Anyway, David Bell, also very suspicious of this idea of, from quantum physics, that fundamentally things don't exist before they are observed. It's a lot of ridiculous notion and it was really, really anathema to both Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen, and very much to David Bell, who was very, very critical of that kind of idea. There's something, he would say, there's something rotten at the base of quantum physics. And then, I think it was in the 80s, early 80s, actually was before that, a fellow whose name I cannot remember, I've written it down here. I lost a slip of paper. But there have been a series of experiments basically going back, I think even starting in the 70s, that actually found a way based on Bell's, it's called Bell's theorem, really brilliant piece of thinking. I proposed the theorem, but there was no way of experimenting it. Someone in California, whose name escapes me right now, picked up on it. Never mind. And did an experiment which seemed to actually refute Bell's and Einstein's intuitions. And said, actually, sorry, things are not definite, there are no things before observation. Later people pointed out, oh, well, there could be a way of explaining those experimental results in another way. So we need to get, we need to take care of those kind of possibilities, shut the door and then make sure, make sure we're really getting the result that we think we're getting. And so Alan Aspect did an experiment. Then very recently, there was another experiment again, sorry, I can't remember the names, it doesn't really matter, but where they basically did the same experiment and used the light from two different quasars. And these quasars are ultra high energy galaxies, billions and billions of light years away. So the light is coming really from near the beginning of the birth of the universe, just after the Big Bang. And for some reason, using the light from so long ago, some reason I didn't explain in the explanation, I didn't understand from that explanation, that was supposed to take care of some of the possibilities of some other factors intruding and distorting the results. And what they found was the same thing. So all the experiments looking at this have proved the same thing and proved two points. One is that indeed objects, things, subatomic particles are not definite things. They are not things before observation. And what they are and how they are, as we've gone into, depends on the kind of observation, the way of looking. They are fuzzy, indeterminate, indefinite, empty of inherent existence. And secondly, it proves that space is not what it seems. So over really astronomical different distances, two particles can be instantaneously connected and there's no signal travelling between them. And the implication is what we think of and how we sense space is just, is not real. Space itself is at some level an illusion. It's massive implications. Time also, not what it seems and what we think. And there are lots of other results and experiments and theories in both relativity theory and quantum theory that also have, and even more so these days, disrupt, shatter our sense and independent existence of space and time. That they are real and that the sense, that normal common sense sense we have of space and time is the reality of them. The common sense sense of space and time, the way we typically think about space and time, what we assume about them is not real, is illusion. Exactly what's going on is unclear, but it's very clear that they are illusion. And our usual sense of illusion. Space is not what it seems. Distance is not what it seems. Things can be intimately, instantaneously connected, entangled with each other over vast distances. Doing something here makes a difference over there. Doing something over there makes a difference over here because the space is not what it seems. So one could pick up those kinds of ideas and say, okay, what does that imply about notions of death and separation? But I actually don't know exactly what that implies with regard to death and our experience around death and dying. So I'm going to leave that. So those are kind of four most normal, normal areas, normal ways of approaching. And actually I want to see if we can approach with a more phenomenological approach via our experiences and what appears to us. Phenomenological approach and an inquiry into that, experimenting with that. I mean, we could pick up this quantum piece because it is the case that inherited beliefs, inherited ontologies, and again we're talking about ontology here. What is the ontology of space? Does it inherently exist? What is the ontology of a subatomic particle? Allegedly the most basic building block of matter. What's the ontology there? But it is the case that inherited beliefs and condition, shape, and limit our experience. What appears to us, and remember the word phenomena means appearance. So might it be that if we start taking ideas from physics or whatever and using them to question our inherited beliefs that might open up our experience with death? Yes, it might. I'm just not quite sure what to take exactly from that other than the most sort of vague notions of interconnectedness and whatever. As I said, what I'd rather do tonight, what I'm going to do tonight is take more of a phenomenological approach, starting with our experience and approach it that way, inquiring. And especially the phenomenological approach as it pertains to, as it emerges from soul-making dharma and sensing the soul practices and openings. So what is our experience when we approach death, our death, someone else's death, or question of death and dying, with the support of soul-making dharma, but with the support and through the modalities of sensing the soul and the kind of openings that sensing the soul brings? So in that phenomenological approach, of course, that phenomenological approach, as much as the phenomenological approach that has to do with just ways of looking at emptiness, both of them recognise that ideas, logoi, conceptual frameworks are always involved in our experience and that they condition experience. So there's always idea, conception, logos, conceptual framework involved in any experience, and it has a conditioning, shaping, fabricating and limiting influence effect on our experience. So an intelligent and more powerful phenomenological approach has to acknowledge that, has to recognise that. And of course, it works the other way too. Our experience, if it's repeated enough and powerful enough, starts to change our ideas, our logo, our conceptions, conceptual framework, and that's all part of the whole ira-psychologos dynamic, that notion. So phenomenological approach, as much as it comes out of and is borne by the sensing the soul approaches and openings, recognising that ideas and logoi are in our experience and inevitably, and that they condition experience, recognising also that there's the possibility of our flexibility with our ways of looking and with the ideas that are in the chitta, in the way of looking at any moment, and the interest in that flexibility of ways of looking and the conception that's in there at any time, and what that does, what that does to experience. So this is really the kind of tap that I want to take tonight. And in terms of ideas, of course, we must acknowledge that we have, or we are the bearers of a mixed inheritance, as much as we are the bearers of a mixed inheritance with regard to ethics, as we were talking, values and all that, with regard to ontology, with regard to epistemology, we inherit from the culture ideas and perspectives and the actual sense of things. And so with regard to death too, inevitably, we also receive a mixed inheritance, a kind of hodgepodge of ideas. So I don't know if I'm making too much of this, but it's just that it came up the other day and it was something I noticed when I was first diagnosed with cancer, going to the hospital and go to the oncology ward for the first time, it was really the oncology ward, so it was after my operation, in fact, so a few months after I was diagnosed with cancer. And there was some talk or there was a sign or something or piece of paper and it was talking about different departments within the oncology department. And one phrase really struck me was the end of life pathway. The patient is on the end of life pathway. And even now at the hospice, the hospice nurse talk about end of life, like it's a phrase now, and how little I heard the word dying or death. In fact, I'm not even sure if I ever have heard a doctor utter or nurse utter those words, actually come to think of it. Passing on. Are those, I'm not sure if I'm sensing something here. It's not a big deal. I'm mentioning it. Or rather, it's not a big deal. It potentially is a very big deal. I think I'm not really sure whether I'm sensing something underneath that. It's actually an expression of something. Are people, is the medical institution avoiding those terms? I'm not sure. And if it is, what's going on? Is it because avoiding words like death and dying and old fashioned are passing on or passing away? Is it that life is all there is? So they talk about end of life. And end of life pathways seemed a little even more kind of bizarre almost to me, sort of jarring as if the choice of terminology, I wasn't sure whether it really come from the hospital administrator's sort of flow chart of how they need to sort of manage all these patients. So they have a flow chart of where the different patient goes into chemotherapy, into radiotherapy or after that doesn't work, then they're on this and then they're on the end of life pathway. And whether that's just a term reflecting more their management solutions than actually a sort of existential position. I don't know. But there seem to be the sort of avoidance of the terms death and dying. Is that because life is deemed as all areas and death is not seen as in itself as something? An event, a momentous doorway, even if it might be a doorway to total non existence, it's still a doorway. If you just avoid that sense or that whole notion of it by using different words, end of life. I don't know. So maybe irrelevant. But as I said, yeah, we've picked up, I think undeniably we have a mixed inheritance as we do for so many things in our culture and probably all maybe many going back to injure at the time of the Buddha, the Buddha had a mixed inheritance. And Tibetans have a mixed inheritance, Tibetan Buddhists and all that. So that's just part of living in a not totally original Paleolithic culture or something. I imagine. Anyway, I don't even know. And we inherit then a mixed bag of beliefs with respect to death. So religious beliefs and traditions, even if we're not religious or whatever that that comes to us from that stream. But also secular or non religious beliefs. And yes, I use that word very deliberately, secular beliefs, non religious beliefs, because usually they're not positions about death that are actually thought through with any great intensity or originality. They're something we inherited from the sort of evolving and emerging secularism of our culture over hundreds of years. And their beliefs, they're not really, they're not knowledges. They're not logical deductions that one has carried out on one's own. They're not certainties. They're not, as I said, not even rigorously with a lot of questioned with a lot of intensity or vitality or originality. So we have all of us, all of us probably have, most of us probably have, let's say, this mixed bag of beliefs, some religious in origin, some secular in origin around death. And that's quite, I mean, I think it's again important to acknowledge, important to realize what's going on with me. What goes on, what steers and shapes and colors and limits my sense of things, in this case of death and dying. And it's also, again, since being ill, some of us run into or are witness to all kinds of expressions that reveal different attitudes and beliefs around death. And sometimes this very mixed bag is apparent in a single utterance that someone might make. So I'm thinking of two people now, and both of them staunchly, even aggressively secular. And both of them said a similar thing. Both had given pretty serious cancer diagnoses, but not necessarily, you know, fatal. Both of these pretty staunchly and aggressively secular men said one was in his fifties, I think, when he was diagnosed, and the other was in his seventies, person in hospital. And both of them said, I feel cheated when they got the diagnosis. I feel cheated. Both staunchly secular and you think, well, how does that work? How can you feel cheated? If you have this kind of aggressive secular position, who is it you feel cheated by? What is it you feel cheated by? Where do you have a sense of an expectation to 80 years of life? What's going on in, again, in the mixed bag of beliefs and inheritances there that you could feel cheated at the same time as espousing a kind of secular view, atheistic view very strongly? So that's interesting in itself, but this kind of strange bedfellows that go to make up our view, our beliefs, our sense of things, our responses to things as basic as death. The second piece here, I feel cheated also indicates something about one's relationship with existence, one's view of existence. How different I feel cheated. I'm owed something. I expect something about the duration of my life. How different that is from a sense of view, an idea, but also a sense, a soul sense of life and death. As gift and illness, life, illness and death. As gift from the divine and somehow to the divine. How different that is and I feel cheated. I'm owed something and I didn't get it. I was expecting something. I expect something. I'm not being given it. Versus life and illness and death as gift from the divine and to the divine. Now I mean this as a sense. Again, all this, all that I'm talking about and most of what I've been talking about in this series of talks and all the soul making Dharma talks is really based on experience. You can hear that and for someone who's outside of that sensibility, who hasn't really had experiences that open up the sense of things, the sense of self, the sense of other, the sense of the cosmos, the sense of death and all that, the sense of illness. Through imaginal practice, through sensing the soul. It's just so alien and disturbing and alarmingly, well just alarming. The sense of your death and your illness are a gift from God. How does that work? Your early death and your difficult illness and your painful illness and all that limitation are a gift. What are you talking about? And it's an affront and a nonsensical notion. But for someone who's practiced, that kind of thing, that kind of blossoming of the sensibility and the very sense of things including one's illness, including one's early death can be there. It's gift from God, from the divinity, from the Dhara Makaya and gift to the Dhara Makaya. And gift meaning mystical gift. Mystical gift from and to the divinity, to the Dhara Makaya. But even that word mystical is so problematic for some people. And for some people it just means nonsense. I've talked about this elsewhere. Something doesn't make sense. Or to do with mystery, but we're not talking about mystery in the sense here of the sort of mystery of why there is existence at all. Why there is a universe. Why are they human beings? Because behind that sense of that kind of mystery is a sort of baffledness, like it's just completely arbitrary. That kind of mystery and that kind of question. Why is there anything at all? Why does anything exist? What a mystery. Actually it's already assuming a kind of purposelessness in the question. It's not really a question. It's just already assuming a kind of purposelessness and calling it mystery. Just this sort of arbitrary, seemingly arbitrary arbitriness of the fact of any existence of anything. But here mystical and mystery as meaning having dimensions, having unfathomability, inexhaustibility, beauty. All of that. And how different I feel cheated. I expect this many years or whatever it is. Versus the whole movement of life and death, gift. The gift of life and the gift of death. Receiving that gift and somehow giving it as well. Giving my life, giving my death. And that being a very different kind of gift, a mystical gift. So what I really want to go into tonight is kind of a little bit, just a few possibilities and many possibilities of what can make death okay. What can make death okay. And even that sounds like a bit of a stupid question because what do I mean by okay? Excuse me. I don't just mean a kind of shrugging, oh well, that's, you know, death. That's just life, right? Life goes with death. It's just life. So that's it. We all have to, you know, that's the deal. I certainly don't mean, oh, I mean much more than that. I mean also much more, this should be already clear, than just bearing the kind of tragedy of loss. It's just okay because I can bear our tragic existential situation. I can bear the poignancy of it. I can bear the fragility of life. I can bear even my personal losses and the grief that comes with that in my heart. So yes, that's a part of it. Can I bear it? Can I hold that? But I really, what can open the whole question up more, the whole issue, the whole panorama, the whole horizon of death up more without reverting to beliefs in rebirth or eternal afterlife, whatever. So this is what I want to just offer a few things, share a few things that may be ways of, among many possibilities, may be ways of opening things up, opening the sense of things up. Now of course death is difficult when it's our death we're contemplating. Usually that's a difficult thing, of course. Sometimes not, for different reasons, but it may have nothing to do with deep insight and deep opening. But death is difficult when it's ours, generally speaking. And of course it's also difficult when it's someone else's, when we love someone. And there's the looming, the death is looming, the death is coming as the imminence of our loss. So it's difficult in both those directions, of course, and I want to say a little bit about both. So what makes death okay? Clearly, well it should be clear to most people that accumulating a lot of money is not going to make death okay. Accumulating a lot of pleasant experiences or having more pleasant and unpleasant experiences is also not going to make death okay. Sometimes, what's more common is people kind of, again it might be not so conscious or not so articulated or it might be, that accumulating experiences makes death more okay. So we have this idea of what is it called? Bucket? Bucket something. The things I want to do before I die, the experiences I want to accumulate. Or even a sense of someone perhaps being told they have a terminal diagnosis or something like that and it's like, oh well, I've done a lot of really good things, I've done a lot of really interesting things. I've travelled here, whatever it is. I've accumulated experiences. So for some people, that's a kind of something that they look to to make death more okay. And it might be to some extent that that works a little bit for some people. It might also be, and what I've noticed is again, this sort of like, oh well, I've had a long life or they've had a long life or at least it's as long as or longer than the average length of life. And if it's less than the average then potentially we can feel cheated. But if it's longer than the average then, oh okay, there's some okayness there. And again, that may help a little bit with some perspectives. You can see how in modern culture we have very little, very little wiggle room to really open up the sense of death and how we might feel about it, think about it, and die. And of course, practicing, noticing impermanence, reflecting on impermanence, letting the fact of the impermanence of all things impress upon you. And the lifetime of doing that will also help with regard to death. And that may be the central sort of reflection that's stressed and that's practiced. And of course that may help, it may well help, it should help. But it may also be quite limited, just repeated reflection on impermanence, repeated impression of the fact of the impermanence of all things. It may also be relatively limited what that can do in terms of how we actually end up feeling about our death or the death of a loved one. So definitely helpful, but may also be limited. And then sometimes you get, of course, well, the other view ends against typical in some streams of Dharma. There's no self really, there's no self that dies, there's just a process of the aggregates. And so because there's no self, there's nothing really to fear in death, because what the self really is, is just this process of aggregates in time, of the physical and mental aggregates. So I've said before, to have that as the only view of self and existence is, well, I don't know what the word for it is, just narrow certainly, but kind of silly, really. It's not adequate for our psychology, it's not adequate for life, it's not adequate for death, it's not adequate for relationship, which I'll come back to. It's not phenomenologically adequate. As a temporary mode of relative kind of perspective that can be used as a provisional truth and a provisional way of looking, it can be helpful at times on its way to something deeper, for sure. But as a kind of primary way of orienting to the dukkha and the pain of death. Not so sure. If you ask me, and I have actually shared this elsewhere, written a little bit about it, what is it for me that makes, as I'm approaching death, what is it that makes my death okay, much more okay? A whole different level of okay, so the word okay doesn't really even do it. What is it that opens out the whole sense of death and brings a level of beauty and peace? There. I've shared this with Seth before, but I think I can divide them into perhaps four. And one is emptiness, practice and understanding. And by which I do not mean limited at that view of the self is just the process of aggregates and timing, something way beyond that. I mean a practice and understanding that opens to the unfabricated, the complete transcendent beyond the deathless. No subject, no object, no time, no world, no this, no that, beyond all perception. That sense of that realm, what I mention as the Buddha sometimes called it, that does something. The timelessness of that, it does something. Sometimes shared with, there's a sense of that being just there as a holy other, transcendent other, and sometimes as shining through existence, through this existence, this world of temporality and thingness and subjects and objects and selves. But it does something, either way, both ways. And similarly, seeing the emptiness of time, the emptiness of past, future and of present, complete emptiness of time, the emptiness of any present moment, something about that, would have to be, of course, death is impermanence. It's connected intimately, obviously, with notions of time, senses of time. You see the emptiness of time and that does something that opens up the sense of death. And of course, as I've talked about recently and before, even going beyond the unfabricated, where we're open to appearances that are felt and sensed and known as empty, magical and divine. I talked about this earlier in the series somewhere, rather. Empty, magical and divine appearances. And in that, with that, shot through all that, in the magic, the emptiness and the divinity is a sacredness. And that sacredness, that sense of sacredness, it comes right out of emptiness practice. The sacredness that comes out of emptiness practice, the sense of sacredness that comes out of emptiness practice, that makes a huge difference. There's so much power in that, in relation to death. The Buddha said in a few different examples, you know, one moment of knowing that is worth a hundred years of... He gives a lot of examples, pain-free life, a hundred years of knowing. He says even knowing impermanence or... One moment of knowing that. The whole sense of existence is... Something happens, it's turned inside out, that's not even the right word. But in that, the whole relationship with death is different, is opened out, is pacified and made beautiful. So for me, that's one real way or direction or approach which really changes the relationship with death. Makes it profoundly okay. And a second is related to what I said earlier about this sense of gift. And at all different levels, receiving gifts, having received gifts, gifts showered on oneself. And also given gifts. So at every level, I can see in my life, I've been given a lot of gifts. I never felt growing up, despite all the craziness and difficulty and dysfunction, to use an out-of-date word in our family and upbringing and all the intensity, intense craziness there. I never felt that I would go hungry or go without a roof over my head, as I ran away. So just that level of gift, and the gift of education and the gift of so many gifts. So at that level, but also the gift of life itself, and the gift of what's given particularly to me, particularly to you. Your particular gifts, and wrapped up in my particular gifts and your particular dukkha, they go together often. Certainly any gift I'm given, any deep gift I'm given seems to bring with it, it's kind of concomitant, accompanying dukkha, it's wrapped up in it. And I can see that I've been given certain gifts in this life and certain abilities and capacities and whatever you want to say. So that's all these senses of gift, and the sense of giving, of having given, that that has been important. It's been so important to me to give, again, lots of different levels, just to practice generosity, but to give of my gifts, and to give to the world, and to give to the future, and to give of the beauty I sense, the beauties I sense, to pass that on, to communicate, to let something come through, to share that. So all these different levels, and what I talked about when I think it was in the talk on pain, that kind of thing, this sense of gift received and given, that sense of existence, and even, as I said, even the illness and the pain and the dukkha and the early death, has been part of why it was received, part of what was gift to me, part of somehow that I am sacredly giving back, or in a sacramental way, giving back. That whole sense of life also does something to our sense of death, I think, very much, I feel, very much. And then a third way is the sense of having done, having tried to do one's duty, having tried in one's life, even if one hasn't really understood it, or had the words, or a conceptual framework that will hold it and carry it, not being able to articulate it, only dimly sensed, or maybe not even sensed at all, that one has tried to do one's duty, one has let oneself and worked, so that one's life refracts the day-mom, reflects the angels now ahead, that call to one, that govern one's life. So this sense too, and one can never succeed in that 100%, I said that the reflection is never completely perfect, virtually, it's always falling short, but one has tried and let that lead one's life, devoted oneself to that, put that as primary. And I've also said if one doesn't think in these terms at all, that one can hear something like that and understand, yes, I can see that I've done that. I've tried to do that. And then, fourthly, connected to the whole thing we were talking about with the ethics talks in this series, that one has lived in a way that's tried to be, one has aspired to living a really worthwhile life, a life that is worth living, a beautiful life. One has aspired towards the good with a capital G, towards what really matters, a sense of what really matters. I've taken the trouble to find out what that is for oneself and to get one's bearings even in times of confusion and being inundated with other pushes and pulls and indoctrinations and advertisements and peer pressure and all kinds of things, risks and threats, that one has lived in that direction, one has tried to live as much as possible in that direction. So those four things, for me, emptiness in that much fuller sense, the sense of gift, received and given at all those different levels and all those different ways, are trying to discern and to do one's duty, duties, refracting the day-mom and the attempt to live what really constitutes a worthwhile life, a sense of that, a beautiful life, a really good life with a capital G. So for me, those are some of the principle things that really make a difference. And of course, all of those are actually connected, those four directions or approaches, especially they're connected through, of course, soul-making practice and the sensing of soul sensibility, the sense of refracting one's day-mom, doing one's duty, the sense of life as gift, gifts received and given at all these different levels, the sense of living in the direction of what senses a really beautiful life and the emptiness of it all, the very neither real nor not real nature of all of that. All of that comes together and is intimately woven together in soul-making practice and sensing of soul sensibility. Actually, just to add something to that list, because most of what's in that list of four things for supports or openings that transform the relationship with death, most of what's in there are kind of currents and efforts and movements and openings over a lifetime or over, you know, years, really, directions. So just to add to that, something which I've already shared in another talk, I think it was in the talk on diet practice, soul-making diet practice, I think it was there, it doesn't really matter, but there is the possibility of being so touched by a soul-making experience, having an opening in imaginal practice or sensing the soul, where one's profoundly moved by a sense of grace, a sense of eternality, a sense of participating in something so unfathomably beautiful and divine. And remember when we use that word participation in this context, in the context of soul-making, we use it as one of the elements of the imaginal, really meaning something much more, much more profound than what its usual meaning points to your participating in this or that. Something almost impossible to articulate, mystery, profundity and sacredness in the sense of that participation. That just having those few minutes of experience transforms the relationship with existence and with death. So it could be in diet practice or in a group soul-making practice, or it could just be solo with so-called intra-psychic image, or it could be sensing the soul, some experience perhaps in nature where there's the sensing the soul and the soul-making imaginal perception. And one feels as if so much grace bestowed on the being, the wonder, the privilege, the profound sacred privilege of opening to something so divine, to the divine in that way. We're just being touched by that, having that grace come, participating that way, having that sense of privilege, that changes the sense of death because of the grace, because of the privilege of participation, because of the opening to eternality, to timelessness. And that kind of experience is very different than what I was talking about earlier, the start of trying to accumulate experiences. Because the attitude and the impulse to accumulate experience tends to be restricted to one dimension, tends to be flat. And therefore it needs more and more experiences, it always needs more experiences, because the Eros there is limited to one dimensionality, because it's not for some reason either because of the limited Logos or for some other reason not allowed to open up more dimensions, to open two more dimensions. They cannot penetrate and open two dimensionality. The Pothos in the Eros, that which wants more in the Eros, cannot go, so to speak, deeper into other dimensions, other aspects, facets of what it wants and what it loves. It has to go, so to speak, horizontally on the same level for more and more experiences. Now I've been there, my travels I have to go there. Now I've been there, I have to go somewhere else. More travel been here, been there, flown here, flown there, seen this, seen that, so to speak. So we've explained this in the ecology of love, I think, past the imagine, or plenty of other places. When the Eros is allowed to open up the dimensionality, open up the Logos, open up psyche, and when there's that really profound experience of an opening to some soul making experience, the imagine of sensing the soul, then it has, in contrast to this kind of accumulation of experience, it has such a humility in it. There's a real humility in it, partly because of the sense of grace, of inexplicable gift. And with it there's also a sense of, this is enough, this is enough, this gift is enough, that glimpse, those couple of minutes, that opening to something, that sense of deep participation, that sense of the privilege of that opening, and that bestowal of grace, is enough. That gift was enough, those two minutes, and that makes a difference in relation to death. It's humility in a sense that this is enough that comes with the grace. And there is a sense, you know, because that experience fades, of course, experiences are impermanent, experience fades, but somewhere in our being, even when that sense of things and that experience feels inaccessible, it's not apparent, we can still be left with, I know something, because I've tasted it, I've experienced it, I know something, even when it's not, at some later time, apparent or accessible. And this knowing in the being, I know something about existence, I know something about human being, I know something about life, and that's something that I know, I can't quite articulate it, I can't really encapsulate it in words. It does something in relation to, it does something to my relationship with death. It's enough, it's enough. And it makes death much more okay. So there's also that, that I would say is really important. There's certainly the importance of the currents in one's life, these longer trends and longer strivings and longer devotions, that the sense of the whole life, with all its beauties and all its difficulties and challenges and travails, and tragedies, all of that as gift received, and all the gifts given, and so many levels of one's life. This is a longer term devotional trend, in the sense of trying to do one's duty, trying to discern, do one's duty, trying to seek out and sense, what is the life that's beautiful, that's worthwhile, that's really good. And even the journey into the experience of emptiness, all this is a longer term devotions and trends. But I just want to add to that, and there's also the possibility, I think a very important possibility of just these openings, sometimes with soul making practice, that are so profound and so imbued with grace and beauty, the sense of the privilege of participation, whatever we want to call it, in the divinity of things, at such a deep level, that those moments, so much longer term trends, but they're moments, or minutes or whatever, sometimes hours, but sometimes they're just really a few minutes, and those experiences potentially can make a huge difference in our relationship with death. It's enough, it's enough, I've had that, and just those two minutes are worth more than a long life, or a hundred years of health, or whatever it is. So that's just a little bit, I want to come back later on and share someone else's experience, or approach to their own death. There's so much to say, we're going to say a little bit, but of course, like I said, sometimes it's another person's death, someone whose death is very difficult for us. And sometimes we encounter people who, what language could we use here, we feel they've lived their image, they've refracted their daymon, to use that language, we feel that, they've lived their image, they've refracted their daymon, they've lived in a way that echoes, mirrors and does the duty of their daymon, of their image, of their, again if we use this language, their individual idea, in that idea with capital I and the ideal realm, individual form, their ideal person, this different language. And when we have that feeling about someone, we are touched deeply by them and their life, and touched by that whole, what we feel we are sensing there and witnessing, because we sense that the divine and the deep soul is coming through that person. I'm thinking of someone like John Coltrane, for me, early death, but somehow just did what he was here to do, so devotedly, so beautifully, really living his image, doing his, the duty of his daymon. And it makes, it touches profoundly, and we have the sense, something is going on here that has to do with, you know, your language, divinity, whatever, God, deep soul, and the soul loves that, the soul loves seeing that, witnessing that, sensing that. And of course, when we have that sense about someone else, when they die, naturally the grief then is deep, for the very same reason, the soul loves that, there's so much beauty there, so much being touched by the divine, there's so much sense of divinity coming through, when they die, the grief will be deep, for just that reason. But in a way, you know, we have them still too, still after death, because in a way they are eternal, their image has impressed itself on us, so they can be an image for us. We're all there, elements of the imaginal, including, you know, the eternality and the timelessness, but they're already an image, and that image lives on with eternality, with timelessness. So we have them, yes there's a loss, of course there's a loss, and of course there's the grief. But somehow, we still have them. In Bach's St. Matthew's Passion, there's a really gorgeous aria, I think it's sung by the baritone or bass or something, but the character is, I think, Joseph of Arimathea, some of you will know from the Gospel stories, he agreed to bury Jesus, or he volunteered to bury Jesus after the crucifixion. And the lyrics of this aria, as in German, which in slightly archaic English translates as, Make thee clean my heart, I will bury Jesus. That's the only lyric of the whole aria. Make thee clean my heart, make yourself pure my heart, I will bury Jesus. And again, I know people have different histories with all this, but for me there's just so much love and soul, certainly in the music, but also in that very sentiment, make thee clean my heart, I will bury Jesus. What does it mean to bury, in this case, to bury Jesus, bury someone we love, bury someone whom we feel they lived their image, the Divine came through them? What does that mean? Bury to bury Jesus, to bury this person in my heart, in my soul. And this is a real possibility for us, that we can do that. Bury this person in the heart, in the soul, really, that they somehow live in me, live for me as image, as icon. So yes, all the grief, I really don't want to say, oh, this erases the grief, it'll just be no problem. But there's a whole other possibility that can open up. I mean, if we take that lyric there, Make thee clean my heart, I will bury Jesus. What does make me clean? Meaning soul making dharma, make yourself clean means purity, purify. What does that mean? It means, in soul making dharma times, it means fullness of intention. That's a purification of our intention. It means all the sensitivity of the poise of sensing the soul, and even the preparation for sensing the soul. It means the elements of the imaginal, the humility, the reverence, the grace, the participation, the autonomy also of self, and other, the beauty, the eros. This is all part of make me clean, all the elements, but particularly forms of intention, particularly humility, particularly sensitivity, particularly the imaginal middle way. There's also a purification. As you know, when that starts to either reify or go the other end where images are dismissed, then it's not... You don't have the container for the real, the power of the imaginal sort of rippling out and opening up more and more horizons. Something will get limited, stuck, rigid, like the view of reality is stuck in either realism or kind of dismissive nihilism. So we do love deeply when we see your sense, or when our sense of someone is that they have lived their image, refracted their dharma. It touches us deeply, and then because of that, yes, there's a deep grief, and we don't really...we want that grief, we don't want to get rid of it, but at the same time as the grief, alongside it, for the very same reason that there's such deep grief, there is the gift of their impression on us, which has already been made, they've already impressed themselves as image, they've impressed on us. And in that sense we can bury them, so to speak, keep them, a place for them as image, as icon in our soul, in our heart. Make me clean, my heart, I will bury Jesus. I don't know if you can hear all the soul and all the love in there. And again, with the help of soul-making dharma, we can take this and interpret it in different ways, that really open it up, and open up our sense of life, our sense of death, our sense of, in this case, the death of another. And it's also the case with all this that, yes, as I said, there will be the grief there, but something is...I don't know what the word is, redeemed, is that not quite the right word? But in other words, it's not just loss, there's gift here, even in the death. The death is gift, the death is loss and therefore grieveable, of course, and grieved, of course. But even what seems like tragic, Jesus's death, very early death, or John Coltrane's death, very early death, what seems tragic can then have, as well as the grief, as well as the tragedy, have this whole other level that it opens up, which is gift and beauty and an opening that sometimes may not have been there even without the death. So much. So, I'm going to talk about the development of the statement of Clement of Alexandria, one of the early theologians, Christian theologians. For him, Providence, the way the divine, or translated into Buddhism, the way that Dara Makaia kind of takes care of us with Providence. Providence does not prevent evil, prevent bad from happening, prevent early deaths of those we love, etc., or ourselves, but seeks to overrule it for an ultimately good end. Providence does not prevent the bad from happening, but seeks to overrule it for an ultimately good end. And we could hear that as a kind of just a doctrine, as something we're asked to believe, and as a certain view. But again, I think with soul making dharma, practice, practice, actual practice, we can open up an actual sense. This is our actual sense. We go through, we don't push away the grief or close the heart, refuse to feel that, doesn't just become, oh, it's fine, everything's fine, oh well, I'm permanent, so that's, oh, now I've got this shiny image, and everything's fine. With all that, there is somehow in the middle of it, in the midst of the difficulty, with the difficulty, around the difficulty, there is this sense of somehow Providence is operating here, somehow this is perfect. And I wrote in my blog something about having a sense that my illness and even my early death is perfect, this is a few years ago. And someone said they really didn't like that, and they can't remember their reasons, but it might have been from a certain religious upbringing they had, or something. But the way they were hearing it was as if it was a dogma, or a philosophy. Everything is perfect, oh, everything is perfect, it's a whole different, much more superficial level, you can hear the brittleness in it. Just try and view everything as perfect, it's silly. But here's, and you can tell when it's brittle, it has a brittle feeling to it, or it has a kind of, sometimes it's not brittle, it's just a little bit kind of almost deluded. Like this person is just not in touch with the dukkha, or the grief, or the tragedy, or the loss, or whatever, or the pain. I'm not talking about philosophy, I'm not talking about a religious dogma or anything, I'm talking about or a view, in the poor sense of the word view. I'm really talking about soul making practice, sensing with soul. In this case, why I share with sensing my own illness, and the prognosis I was given, and the difficulty in the physical dukkha, and the full knowledge of likelihood of dying early, soon, in the next couple of years. I'm sensing that with soul, and out of the very practice, not out of a kind of, sort of, cheap idea of religious teaching or philosophy, but out of practice, then, I don't know what language, use a mystical sense that everything is perfect. And not in a way that got rid of dukkha, or put me out of touch with dukkha. In this sense also that everything is perfect, that comes out of practice, again, it, it, it, like seeing the emptiness of things, if it, if its fruit is then in action. Oh, everything's perfect, so I don't have to worry about social injustice, and racial injustice, and environmental injustice, and all the rest of it. Something's wrong, something's wrong, it's coming more from some idea, in a, in a, in an undigested way. It's not been digested in practice, it's just an idea. Some things you can, you can feel it, it's just off. But this kind of sense of the perfection of things, this kind of sense of some mysterious providence working through tragedy, putting it in a bigger arc, a bigger trajectory, a bigger picture, a bigger unfolding. The sense that comes out of practice does not, is not brittle, includes the dukkha very much, and the softness and sensitivity of heart, and the openness of heart, and does not lead to inaction, and not caring. So I'm really talking about what comes out of, I'm really talking about a sense of things, and a view of things that comes out of practice, not a, not a sort of easy idea. And, you know, like I said, most of the stuff I've been talking about, certainly in this series of talks, in another series, it's, it's, needs to be approached via practice, rather than just hearing, and not practicing, listening and not practicing, and just hearing some ideas or whatever, or hearing some far, far out sounding experiences, it's only going to cause problems, or have no effect whatsoever. But if there's really that soil of practice being turned, then you have a very different understanding of what we're talking about here. So of course, I mean, in the examples I gave, you know, Jesus and John Coltrane and stuff, it's, to me, clearly, you know, special people, you really get a sense, wow, that something's going on there, they're really living that image, or whatever language one would use, the divine is really coming through. But this, I'm opening up and, I don't know what the word is, redeeming, redeeming of the sense of the death of a loved one. It's not only for special people, it happens, it can happen, it should happen, actually, it can happen, in any relationship we have, in any deep relationship we have. Because in deep relationship, the other becomes image for us, in deep human relationship, the other becomes image for us. Deep relationship has imaginal dimensions. I've talked about this before, in a way. So let me try and explain something and see, hopefully I can explain it. When, in a way, this relates to stuff I talked about in the Four Powerables of Stone and Light series, when you're talking about soul making diet practice. But in a way, like I said, it actually applies, so this is part of the phenomenology, in other words, part of the actual experience, I would say, of any deep human relationship. Any time we really love, or we're really devoted to a relationship, we have, if we can explain it a certain way, maybe you can see it visually in your mind, if that helps. We have the kind of what's agreed on in society, contemporary society, we have one level of the relationship, there's this human being and that human being. And the relationship happens in time, and if I know this person long enough, then there's my old act, or rather the acts between us, the things we've done and the interactions we've had in the past. So temporal, but in the past, and I still have access to at least some of them, not many of them, through memory. And of course, in an ongoing relationship, there's new actions and interactions and dialogue and all that. So you have one level, and it's the agreed upon level of what human relationship is, is it happens in time between two human beings who are actually conceived of as flat, not dimensional, other than being dimensional in the non-soul making ways we consider human beings dimensional these days, conventionally in the culture. So you can see that as a kind of, if you make a diagram in your mind, human and human. And two lines between them, old in old actions, let's say, and new actions. And all of that is on a temporal level, is unfolding in time. But if on your little mental diagram, then above each of those humans, human A and human B, in this whatever relationship they have, maybe they're just really good friends, whatever it is, in a way, there's the image. Let's just keep it singular for now. There's an image of human A and an image of human B. And human A has a sense of their own image, their own Daemon. So it's another, again, it's another dimension of their being. But human B also has a sense of their Daemon. And then each human has a sense of the other's Daemon, so to speak. So there's, in soul making diapractics, you can play with this a little bit. But really what I'm pointing to is what's there anyway in human relationship. So you've got now a diagram with human A and human B, and then whatever we're going to call image A and image B above corresponding to human A and human B. And that level of the image, let's say someone's living their image, that level is a timeless level. And then the level in time is new and old actions and interactions. But actually you've got relationships, or let's call it strands and directions of relationships, between every corner here. So you've got two kinds of strand of relationship from the conventionally human to conventionally human level, the new and old interactions, make two. So you've got human A's interaction with their own image, and you've got human A's interaction with human B's image, and human B's interaction with human A's image. And then you've got the image's interaction with each other. Now all of this kind of becomes much more, let's say, discriminated and discrete and apparent when you really explore soul making diapractic. I've been making diapractic as I unpacked a little bit in that long talk on soul making diapractic in the last series, the Four Parable series. But this is a way of thinking of what's actually going on. So it becomes more apparent in formal soul making diapractic. But I would say actually it's there in any deep human relationship where there's love and devotion to each other. That all these levels and all these possible connections between different levels are going on. Now in some people that think this way, and they're quite rare these days, but in some people they use the terms image and analog. So there's the image level, we could say the Daemon level, the angel level, or a human being. And then what we've called up to now the human level is called the analog. So in a way the terms don't really matter. We could say image and analog. The image is the timeless and the interactions between the analog level happen in time. And image to analog level happens sort of between the timeless and time. So I hope that makes sense a little bit. Let me say a bit more about that. And why is this important? Because as I said I think this is what goes on in human relationships anyway. So usually in our culture, in our culture's language, image is the word image is considered a secondary phenomenon. We say an image of this or that and this or that is primary. So it's an image of the tree. It's not the real tree. The real tree is the real thing and the image of the tree is a secondary thing. It re-presents something more fundamental or something real. As we were talking about just yesterday I think it was in fact, Plato had that whole ontology reverse, the hierarchy reverse, so that the ideal realm was considered by Plato more real. And this world was a re-presentation, an attempt at reflecting, refracting that more ideal world. So the image in that way I think about it as primary and the analog, what we call the human, is secondary. So words are tricky here but also ontologies are really important here. Now for one, I want to say actually we could have either ontology, we could have the image level, what we're calling the image level is primary, and the analog or human level is secondary, or we could reverse that and consider the human, the primary and the image secondary. In a way it doesn't make much difference but I do think in the overall kind of scope of soul making dharma practice there will come a time inevitably where at times that hierarchy gets, the sense of that hierarchy gets reversed and you can play with that, or you can even deliberately play with entertaining such an idea, such a notion, or it will just get reversed anyway in the natural unfolding of soul making practice for a time. And again it's then not clung to as this is the truth, this is the way things are, this is the correct conceptual framework. It becomes part of a flexibility, a range of flexible conceptual frameworks that we can work with. One of my favourite composers, I think he's a great composer, he died just a few years ago, Peter Maxwell Davis, has I think a really stunningly beautiful, very complex but stunningly beautiful piece of image reflection shadow, I think it's for quinte or sextet, and image reflection shadow and reading his liner notes, what he meant by that was, or it came to him seeing, and somehow it's sort of played out in the music, but his notion here, but he saw a seagull over sunlit water by the sea which used to live on one of the islands of Scotland and composed a lot of music there which really has a lot of that atmosphere of the sea and the space and the old magic up there. Anyway, image reflection shadow was this seagull flying low over the sea and the sun was out so it was both reflected in the water, the image of the bird, there was a reflection in the water, there was the image of the bird for his eyes, and there was a reflection in the water and there was the shadow of the seagull on the water. And so somehow that became a sort of paradigm for the music somehow. But maybe these words are better, image reflection shadow, so reflection or refraction may be a better word than analogue for some of us. Image, we are the reflection or refraction potentially of an image, d'Aime. And shadow meaning with that connotation of relative darkness, that even our distortions are somehow poor and blocked vestiges or echoes of an original emanation. So like a light shadow is that, it's a vestige, it's what's remaining of light that's blocked by something, partially blocked by something, but it's also an echo of light, if we can speak of that, because it's light reflected off from other places where that thing is not in the way. But even our, we've talked about this before, even our mistakes and our neuroses and our malfunctions can potentially be seen as related to that original emanation from the image. So we get the reflection or refraction when it's the sort of, when we're more true to that image. But even our messed up stuff can be seen, our distortions as poor and blocked echoes or vestiges of that. So actually, in fact, image and whatever we're going to call it, refraction or analogue, are mutually dependent. They affect each other. It's not so much that, it's not entirely or strictly speaking, a one-way emanation process from image to reflection, refraction from image to analogue, from image to human. We understand, as part of the soul-making dharma, understanding is that they affect each other. There's a mutual dependency there. And another thing about this idea before I say, what's this got to do with death, etc., is, in a way I've touched on it, hinted at it, alluded to it, but we could, and I did when I said, can you imagine a diagram where image is above, you draw the image above the human just to get a sense of all the different lines between the different corners, or human A, human B, image A, image B, whatever. Of course, we could, I suppose, conceive the relationship between image and analogue here in spatial relationship, or spatial constellation as like above, below, or below, above, or around, within, or within, around. The image is within the human, or below it comes up from the depths, the dark, rich depths of the earth, or it comes down from the luminous heights of heaven, or whatever, we could conceive them in spatial terms like that, in any of those spatial terms. Much better, I think, is probably to jettison the idea of a spatial and a temporal location or existence of image, or angel, or daemon. Okay, I've touched on this before, sometime in the last year or so. This is really, really important. Perhaps the analogue is the manifestation in space and time, a partial and refracted manifestation in space and time, of what is non-spatial, non-temporal, what is timeless, the image. So this image has a kind of timeless existence. The angel is neither spatial nor temporal, and the analogue is this refraction or reflection into time and into space of what is non-spatial and not temporal. And again, we can say all this, okay, with really metaphysical, far out metaphysical ideas, but is it not the kind of sense we have of things if we just open up soul-making practice? At some point, this is the kind of sense we have of things. And this is there in a germinal way, at least, or a non-articulated, non-discriminated way in relationships where there is love, and deep relationships, and intimate relationships, and we have that. That's all mixed up, and it's just our culture doesn't have the language or the conceptual framework that supports that kind of articulation or discrimination. So what I want to ask now is what happens to this whole constellation of relationship, which means the sense of relationship after one person dies? Because actually, in a way, most of the fabricating constituents of the sense of, let's say, the person who dies, for the person who remains alive, most of the fabricating and the creating, discovering constituents remain. The image of the other, the memory of past interactions, actions, and even potentially new interactions, but mediated by a purely, I can say, purely imaginal consciousness. So of all the kind of strands of connection in our little diagram, it's only the analog-to-analog, human-to-human level of new actions, new interactions, that doesn't remain, that seems to have gone after death. Most of the fabricating, the creating, discovering constituents of the sense of the one who has died, and what makes our sense of them, is actually still there, remains after their death. Actually, I don't know, are any of the constituents really fully separate from any other? I don't think they are. But as I said, if in fact a human person, what we mean by human, or we sense of a human person, or we can sense of a human person, is really, or more fully, comprised of what, in this sort of scheme, I've tried to probably very closely explain, is comprised of what we call, in this kind of scheme, is called image and humour, or image and analog. In other words, that's really what a human being is, and that's really the sense of what we have as a human being, or we have of human beings, human beings that we love. If it's really that, then the question is, does death change that much, or is it potentially that death changes only a small portion of the actuality of human relationships? Because the image to image, and human to image, and image to human, and the memory of human to human level, old actions in time, all that remains. So this is quite, I hope I've explained it clearly enough. I probably could have done better, but again, it's so different than how we usually, how we've grown up, what we've inherited in terms of the way we think about human being, and the way we think about what am I in relationship with, and what is a person, because there's no room in our culture for this imaginal level, or this idea of somehow this person is refracting something timeless, and the relationship is multi-stranded and multi-dimensional between two human beings, and a human being is multi-dimensional. It's very unsupported as a notion in our culture, so it might sound completely bizarre, even ridiculous, what I'm trying to say, if you can follow it even. And I certainly don't mean again to say, oh, just see things this way, and then there'll be no grief. But it's certainly, I hope it's clear and not the same, saying, oh, well, they'll die and you've got your memories already. You've got your memories at least. I'm saying much more than that. So right now, in relationships with the living, if we open our sense of that, if we can sense with soul, with the love, and you see, sense them, what's actually there, what's already there in your sense of human being, when they're sensed with soul? And then what does that do to the sense of death, or the sense of loss? It doesn't, it won't take the grief away, but it will give something that, in a way, we prevent ourselves from receiving and being open to and having, when we are prevented by the culture, by the linguistic and conceptual inheritances. Someone we love dies, and there's still all these different dimensions of relationship there, that were there when they were alive too. It's not like now they die, and now they're moving in space and time, somewhere in the spirit world, and maybe we can communicate with them through a seance or something. While we're alive, these other dimensions are there. And if we acknowledge these other dimensions, and these other connections between dimensions, and the different, as I said, the different strands of communication, of love, of connection, of seeing, of intercourse, while we're alive, we start to have a different sense of how much we've lost when a person dies. Image is with us. Image communicates with us. We communicate with image. Image communicates with image. Memory becomes image. Think about this sense of human being, again, the sense of human person and personhood, and what is it to really be a person? What is it not to limit the sense of what a human being is, and what a human person is, and our personhood? A lot about the Dharma is about deconstructing the sense of self and all that, seeing its fabricated nature, stripping it down. And that's so valuable. And we can talk about completely unfabricating the sense of self, or a less fabricated sense of self, or really the most basic sense of self, just the barer sense of a subject, of an awareness, the barer sense of an object, and the barest, the most basic sense of time of a present moment. And that's the most basic level of self-fabrication, this side of the unfabricated. And one way we can fabricate it is towards Papansha. Crazy ideas about ourselves and others and relationships, and all reified and tied up in knots with it. But there's also fabrication that's skillful. We've talked about soul-making fabrication, the fabrication of the soulful image, the imaginal. So I don't know about language, but we could say, you know, you're actually, one is a self whenever there is any perception of objects, whenever there's any subject object, even the barest, like just a nothingness and an awareness. Subject, object, object, subject. But we are, I don't know what the word would be, we're persons, full persons, only where there is relationship of some complexity, with some sense for us of meaningfulness and depth and dimensionality of our persons and others. And that relationship, it may be relationship with a physically manifesting sentient being, someone who's alive with us, or an animal. It may be relationship with a divinity, an angel, a so-called purely imaginal manifesting. Or it may be something in nature, supposedly non-sentient. But I don't know if that's the right division of language, self and person, but subject and person maybe. We are persons when we are in relationship, when there is relationship as if some complexity for us, with some sense for us of meaningfulness of depth, dimensionality of our own personhood and of the others. So even when there's just the beginnings of that, of meaningfulness of depth, dimensionality, even just the beginnings of what we would say the elements of the imaginal, perhaps, then we're more than subjects, we are persons. You can use self for the whole spectrum if you want. The word self for the whole spectrum. But both subjects and persons are empty, they're dependent, arising. But as always, and as keeps stressing, the fact of emptiness, the fact of their emptiness, the fact of their emptiness of any conception and any sense and any view of subject, self, person, means that actually that we are free to view that way, because all views are empty. We're free to view that way, we're free to pick up that view if we want. And the question is, what does it lead to? What does it open for us? And what does it limit? As I said, if I'm always, if I love someone, and I think, oh, they died or they're dying, and so I'll use my Buddhist history and practice and I'll regard them as a process of the aggregates, it just does not do justice to our relationship, to their personhood, to their life. It certainly doesn't do justice to soul, it's phenomenologically incomplete. What will it lead to if that's my only view? I'm always trying to or thinking I should see the other person as a process of aggregates. Going back to teachings we've given for a while, there's the whole teaching about fabrication, there's unfabricating, and there's skillful fabricating and unskillful fabricating. The question is, what does it lead to? All of it's empty, all of it's empty. So we can pick up anywhere on the spectrum and adopt a view. And the question is, what does it open for us? What does it deliver? What does it give us? And I hope you followed this, I probably could have explained it better, but it would be, I think, very common to think, well, okay, well, that's all a metaphysical theory about what a human being is and about an image and an analogue and a level of angels and all this stuff. Is it, though, or again, or is it more a phenomenological account? In other words, it's how we experience persons in relation to our person anyway when there's love, when there's a real depth of connection, when there's a soulfulness in the connection, when we have a sense of a relationship that we're devoted to. We've been gradually, over the course of history, recent history, indoctrinated to believe and then to experience in line with a view of what a human being is and what the cosmos is, that some of which we traced in the recent talks on ethics, the image of ethics, was actually started from metaphysical theories, from philosophies, from theological moves about not having intermediaries and about the elevation of ordinary life and not having hierarchical order of the cosmos which then got replaced with a horizontal order. All those philosophical, metaphysical and theological moves had repercussions, which have been very sketchily traced through history, so that what we feel now as normal and non-metaphysical, we feel like we're just seeing things as they are naturally without any overlay or distortion through metaphysics and philosophy and strange religious notions. But it actually had its roots in philosophy, metaphysics, theology and religious notions. It also had its roots in the gradual birth of the modern novel, this view of humanity, the emphasis on particularities, on ordinary life. And the modern novel, one of its main origins, seeds, was journals written by Puritans who had this view of a very personal, unmediated relation with God in us, non-hierarchical universe, et cetera, unmediated relationship with God. So all this, you know, we tend to think, oh, you've just described some really complex, bizarre metaphysics as some kind of weird idea that you're trying to superimpose on the way things really are. But maybe our sense of the way things really are is actually an indoctrination, inculcation, and inheritance from something that started from metaphysics, theology, philosophy. And B, our sense of the way things are is not actually an accurate report for us of the way things are for us. Look closer, sense closer when there's love and the relationship is really alive that way. Again, is it not the case that at least the germs of what I'm trying to talk about here are actually already there in the sense we have of things? There's something that we've inherited that just makes us rule that out or not take that seriously or not see it even, not sense it, not discriminate, discern, and articulate it, and then in that way give it support. So we lose someone to death, they die, we're left. And yet it may be that a lot more is possible in terms of the continuing sense of relationship connection with them than we tend to think that a lot less of the real whole of what was there in our relationship, what flowed in our relationship, a lot less is lost of the whole than we thought. That much more is still open, still possible, still alive really. And yes, there's still grief, there's still loss, there's still the pain of that, there's still the wishing it weren't the case, perhaps. But to open this up it's almost like we have to allow ourselves to see and the sensing the soul will really help to open up this sense. So that's one, well that's a few possibilities. I want to share something from a close friend in relationship, just tracing. She was okay for me to share this, I asked her. Slightly different, well quite different, journey and approach to loss of a loved one in this case, my being given a metastatic diagnosis, pancreatic cancer, which is pretty much always fatal. And it was shortly after I got that diagnosis and with all the implications that we knew that life was, you know, I was going to die from this probably quite soon. So this is parts of her report I will read. So again, what I'm really showing here is how can this terrible deep grief and loss at the death of someone we love, how can that be opened up in a different way? How can the soul making and the sensing the soul help and support that to be opened up in a different way? A different sense of that, different possibilities. So I'd got that diagnosis, knew what it meant and the implications of dying, that I would not be cured from this disease, that it would kill me, relatively soon. And so she was quite upset and quite distraught. And this is only part of her account, so this is in her words now. Can this become soul making? He gently asked. He is me. Can this become soul making? Can this become soul making? He gently asked, reminding me through his question that this was possible and what I wanted. Thank you. Yes, it can, I said. Recognizing in that moment I was a little stuck and in some vague contention with the reality of the situation. And while contention felt better than collapsing, it definitely wasn't soul making. And so perhaps this can be my question now as we embark on this leg of the journey. And she kind of just lists her awareness of what this leg of the journey would involve and imply in the dukkha and the loss and all of that. And so can this become soul making? In theory, yes it can. And what will support that? Remembering this question for a start and recognizing that caring for the dukkha in this way could be a fitting and beautiful offering to my beloved friend. In other words, caring for the dukkha through soul making. My faith tells me this is possible. I have faith in soul making. She has done a lot of soul making practice. My faith tells me this is possible. But I do not know what this will look like as we face this time or if I am up to the task. But I can see that the question itself offers a frame, a way to orient the time ahead, whatever it may bring. So I really want you to hear the wisdom in this. It is all about the skill in the approach and the wisdom in the approach. There is this difficulty, stuckness, and contention, collapse, then just contention. Then it is, oh, can it be soul making? Yes it can. I have some faith in that. So that is already a big step. And then what will support that? And then the question, can it be soul making? What will support the soul making here itself? That question, as she says, offers a frame, a way to orient the time ahead, whatever it may bring. Whatever the time ahead may bring. She continues, and as I let the question strike me, I light up my sense and my posture straight and naturally. And I line up as if I am filled with trillions of iron fillings that line up before a magnet. Okay, I recognize this is helpful. She is using the energy body sense as telling her she is on the right track. Taking on this question, can this become soul making? I am already much less in contention with the reality of the situation. And my loving desire is switched on again towards what I most love, soul making. This lining up, as well as being strengthening and helpful, seems to make my human heart at once incredibly vulnerable, impactable, and tender. And at the same time, steady, bright, and unwavering. As if allowing this question to strike me has the effect of beginning to shape me into the kind of organism that might be able to perceive all of this soulfully. See the art and the skill here? Just can this become soul making? What will support that? And that question, together with a little bit of faith, starts to do something. Starts to shape her into the kind of organism she writes that might be able to perceive all of this soulfully. I sense myself at a threshold now, where the conventional sense of myself, who is looking forward in time to the painful and demanding journey ahead, gets the sense of more possibilities with this inevitable dukkha. Something in the air is attractive to me, and my soulful antennae, my soul antennae, are peaked more as possible here. She realizes more as possible here. And, staying close to the emotional impact of this news, I feel first what I might still call a contention with reality. I don't want you to die. I don't want my beloved friend to die, because I don't. But I let myself sense this without collapsing around it. And she lets herself sense the contention, I don't want you to die without collapsing around it. And then comes the desire. The other sign of I don't want you to die is I feel a strong desire, a desire for him to be well, and a desire for him to live forever. I want you to live forever. Not cutting that off for being ridiculous and unrealistic. Just letting myself have it. So human, so understandable, so passionate. And very close to this desire, I feel a kind of objective helplessness of being human beings in the face of death. So there's so much here. There's the contention, the don't want, then realizing there's a want that's the flip side of the want. Not dismissing the want, even if it sounds ridiculous, I want you to live forever, how could that possibly be unrealistic? Letting herself have it, letting herself have that very human, understandable passion. And then close to that desire, very naturally, and there should be the sense of helplessness, we're helpless as human beings in the face of death. And she continues, as I sense the current of the desire in my body, this desire, I want you to live forever, it comes through this vulnerable and utterly human spot in my heart. And that narrow spot in my heart starts to expand with the current. And as it expands, it is also illuminated. And as everything gets brighter in the whole chitta, I am stopped in my tracks. My senses are arrested by a beauty that I start to sense. Something is happening here and a beauty is opening up and it's arresting. Right there, not divorced from the pain and reality of the situation, not losing any of its personalness, right there, he and I are being woven into image. The soulscape of extraordinary beauty. Horizontal time is relieved from being the whole and the only truth. And I am somehow being loved by this whole scene, by the whole image. He and I, woven into image, and horizontal time, not the whole truth, the whole scene is loving her, that's her sense. And the grace of this, until now, only unwanted suffering, the grace is apparent and makes me humble. His illness and imminent death not reducible to a single meaning for him, for me, or for the Sangha. This perception is so blessed, so blessed. The pain is not necessarily taken away, but it is happening within a soulful cosmos, where dimensionality and meaningfulness are shimmering with a startling beauty right here in the tragedy and loss. At once deeply human and utterly beyond. Can this become soul making? Yes it can, and I bow. So this was the first stage, actually, of a journey with this whole in-souled relationship with death. It started to really open something up a little while later. She had a dream. And in the dream there was a black snake coming out from down under a kitchen counter in the house where she grew up. And she was sitting in the dream with her family and everyone was horrified, oh my god, this black snake, that shouldn't be there. At some point in the dream it shifted to somehow, that's not wrong somehow. It's not wrong that this snake is there. At first it felt it was wrong and then somehow it didn't. So in the way that sometimes what is immediately disturbing to the mind, the usual mind or the mind thinks, oh that's wrong, that can't be right, the imaginal practice. In a similar way that that shift happened in the dream. The next morning she took that image of the black snake into her meditation practice and let it become imaginal, helped it become imaginal. And found that the snake loved her, as it would if it becomes imaginal, it's one of the elements, one of the elements of the imaginal. But also that the snake itself seemed to kind of contain multiple images. And one of these images related to, or kind of related to then my death and her feelings about my death. So again at some point later on there was again this, I don't want you to die. And again she really let herself feel it. And letting herself have this, I don't want, loosened something. Really letting herself have this, I don't want you to die. It loosened something without dissolving that I don't want. So we can loosen things so that they dissolve, completely unfabricate. Or we can loosen things so that enough with slight unfabricating so that they actually can become more soul making. So it's like a cry out to the cosmos, I don't want you to die. I don't want you to die. And she also realised that if she was either a good Buddhist or a good existentialist, she wouldn't have this thought, I don't want you to die. And again, I want you to live forever. And how ridiculous that sounds from a sort of Buddhist perspective or an existentialist perspective. And with all this she noticed something else, that her sense of death, her sort of almost subliminal sense of death was a kind of a big black empty space. And she realised, subtle discrimination, she realised, oh this is the usual sense of death in the cultures that I move in. Either it's a kind of nihilistic nothingness, just a big black empty space, the end of personhood. Or it's a kind of spiritual big black empty space, a kind of universal emptiness or oneness or essence. And she's like, my logos here, my, what I'm used to thinking, my habitual conception and notion is part of my sense of death here. And that's being brought in automatically and it's colouring, it's shaping, it's forming and limiting the view I have of death. Either to the standard secular view, a kind of nihilistic view or a kind of spiritual assumption of this dissolving into universal emptiness. And then realising, ah, conditioned by the logos as we talked about right at the beginning tonight. And that realisation, ah, there's some conditioning by the logos, by the imported habitual notions here that I get from the two main cultures I move in, the secular culture and the culture of Buddha Dharma, spiritual circles. Realising that fact of the conditioning by logos, by an idea, an imported habitual unquestioned ideas. And that, in realising it, that lost its grip and the sense of my death was allowed, and death itself was allowed to become more imaginable. She also realised something else, that if, ah, if she could, there was a notion that if she could accept the pain then she would be at peace with it, or she should be at peace with it. And then realising about what the imprisoning logos was, what the limiting logo it were, and where she'd got them in fact, because the acceptance and peace with it also comes from Buddhist spiritual teachings. And it was that realisation that loosened something and then the sense of death could become imaginal. And then she said there was a sense then, then I got the sense that your death is eternal, it's always here. My friend's death is eternal, it's always here. So it was more than, it certainly wasn't not wanting death, but it's more than accepting death. And as it was allowed to become image and become eternal and always here, the death is always here. Then she got the sense, the very palpable and moving sense, your death loves me. Your death loves me. Of course from a mainstream conventional typical perspective, what on earth does that mean? Your death loves me. But when things and events become imaginal, when we sense them with soul, with things and events, not even talking about, um, incentient, organic beings like trees, but things and events, your death, when it becomes imaginal, when they become imaginal, they have personhood, they have intelligence and autonomy and love and heroes. And this made so much skill here and beauty in the way of working, very difficult, but then so much being touched, the soul being touched by this sense of your death loves me. Your death loves me. And your death is eternal, it's always here, it's always already happening. The death has become image with all the beauty and all the gifts that are given to us when we sense something with soul, all the gifts that that opens up in our sense of something. And the way that was a second stage, and then, so something happened perhaps more long term, in her logos, in the ideation that she carried around, the death is not only an impersonal thing, more importantly that impersonal depth is not more true than personhood. So, as if that big black empty space from a spiritual perspective or from a nihilistic perspective is somehow more true. Well, actually she's talking mostly in a spiritual context, sometimes we're taught to see that emptiness is more true, that absolute is more true than personhood, etc. Now, with these experiences, impersonal depth is not necessarily more true than personhood. So, it opened up something more permanently in her ideation and perspective, her logos around death. So, this becoming image of my death, becoming imaginal, my death loving her, little later on enabled for her death to become image, for herself, to become imaginal image. So, here is the third stage, she's describing practice she did actually while she was taking flight. So, she was practicing on a plane and her death became image. She writes, my death as beloved other, as deity, as enchanted, the most fulfilling perception, I love the image of my death. She is here as beloved other, the most intimate other, she knows me so well, I feel loved in a way I had never before known. So, my death is here as beloved other, the most intimate other who knows me so well, and I feel loved by this, my death in a way that I have never known. I love her and I ask, how can I come closer to you, I want to know you more. So, there's the Eros, the Eros in a way that's going to allow the whole Erosaki logos dynamic to ignite further, open, expand, complexify deeper. And she writes, I contract for a moment in judgement as fellow passengers on this flight throw away their plastic cups after one drink. I contract and lose sight of my death, of the sense of the image of her death, the destruction of the planet and our ignorance, seemingly more real than my beloved. But my heart, but I see my heart is lost for that moment, and so I light a candle at the altar of my beloved and I kneel. So again, something, just to highlight the skin I'm working, something to distract, something contracts her, in this case, she's on a flight that she had thought a lot about even taking, given the climate crisis, decided to take it, decided on the balance of things. The right thing to do. And her soul, you know, felt this soul making choice to do, and then contracting at this throwing away of plastic so easily, that distracts her and interrupts her process as a contraction of the being, and she loses the image. And she's like, okay, okay, recognize what's going on. Can I, so to speak, light a candle at the altar of my beloved and kneel. So there's the taking care of, what I called the other day, the poise for soul making, that enables us to open to soul making to image. And then she says, tears upon my return, and the settling of the disorientation that came in the contracting. I love you. She's talking about her death. I love my death. I love you. You feel like the most meaningful relationship I have ever had in so many ways. It is as if you were there before I was born. Again, from the mainstream point of view, this is all probably sounds completely mad. Someone talking about the image of the death. I love you. It is as if you were there before I was born. You define my existence, not in the existentialist or literal ways of being an end point. Your reality status is not end point. That designation flattens you. And in so doing, one would not see your beauty. You are more a beginning point, if anything. But careful, there's no implication here of the usual beliefs of afterlife or rebirth or whatever. She's not talking about beginning point in those senses. The beginning of the afterlife, the beginning of the next birth or whatever. You are the most beautiful image I have ever seen. And the death of my body in time seems like one tiny image within your numberless dimensions. I can hardly believe it. It is not that physical death is insignificant. It is indeed one image in the wings of your magnificence. But you are so much more. You, my death, are resounding right through the cosmos. You are so intimately personal to me, and yet you seem to ring everywhere in many spheres, all at the same time. You know me as a point of time and space, and you love me as a human more closely and precisely than anything. And yet you also intimately mirror a multitude of other images that seem to exist in multiple other realms. So the whole image is, again, doing exactly what we would expect if Eros is allowed to galvanize and open the soul-making dynamic. Eros, psychologos, and mutually fertilize each other, complexify, etc. Take each other deeper, wider, further. She continues, this is different from the personal and seemingly eternal death in Carlos Castaneda. I don't really know that, but she's referring to it where one can consult this intimate companion about how to love one's life, knowing that death is always here at your shoulder. My death is not principally a point in time, or related to the point of space and time of my physical death. And nor is my death an annihilation, and nor is she impersonal. My death is somehow my fulfillment, and meeting her now I am called to my fulfillment. But this fulfillment is now and eternally now, when she is known in erotic, imaginal meeting. I am drawn to this fulfillment, but it is not a fulfillment of accumulation of qualities, it's not that kind of fulfillment. It is a fulfillment of knowing my place as soul in a sacred cosmos, so completely woven into all dimensions, and that guiding divine being is my death. Here death as idea is soft and elastic, and death in time is one image in the divine theater. It is not about making my physical death unimportant or relativized or small. To say small we'd contrast it with big or bigger, and this is not the correct word. For what is more, isn't the correct word for what is more or more than one image? Sorry, it's not the correct word for what is more or more than one image. Logically, one should be able to say that the collective of multiple images is bigger than or greater than one image, like ten is more than one. However, in eternality and in the imaginal middle way, smaller than and bigger than do not make sense. In eternality and in the imaginal middle way, smaller than and bigger than do not make sense. It is not governed by logic. Size and proportions only belong with the arising of time and space and the appearance of this world. This lack of proportions is somehow very significant. This is very different from the results of Buddhist reflections on death as I have practiced them at least. This reflection does not rouse my passion as an urgency for a path of practice in time. It's one of the ways we usually teach reflection on death to arouse urgency for practice, path of practice in time. She says, it's not that, but it does rouse my passion as a tremendous eros for eternality, for timelessness. It does rouse my passion as a tremendous eros for eternality. It does also bring a steadying of my heart, but I wouldn't say it is an equanimity born from understanding and including the whole picture and being able to see the conditions of the world of time and space from a great view. It's not that kind of standard way, one of the standard ways we reach equanimity, seeing the whole picture, stepping back, seeing, taking a larger view of conditions, a large span of time and space. Rather, the steadying comes from the mind easily concentrating because this is the most compelling, meaningful and loving encounter. There is no effort to steady the heart. I think it's going to impact this a lot more and explore the steadiness and equanimity from lots of other aspects too. She touched on some of that in other talks and things about eros and equanimity and stuff, but there's a lot to say here. She says, and my death smiles at me as I recognise this. My duty is to re-enchant death. So much here in terms of the skillful ways of working, in terms of the ways something can start as a difficulty. Just asking the question, can this be soul making? Can it allow it to open up, get a different sense of it? Then that can be added to by an image that at first seems to have nothing to do with it, a snake, and open further. And then we get a very different sense of things, very different sense in this case of my death, her friend's death. And then that kind of gave her confidence and a platform or, I feel like, was a spark that in her turn, in its turn allowed her to sense her own death with soul, for her own death to become image. And that opening up all its sense of beauty and dimensionality there, sacredness, in terms of her death, but also in terms of the whole cosmos. So much that's instructive, I think, in all this. I just wanted to include that for that reason, as well as what I had shared earlier, just to offer some possibilities for opening up our sense of death and dying, whether it's our own or in others. What can we bring to that? How can we meet that with soul genuinely? What happens, what might happen when we do? So these are real possibilities for the soul, possibilities that make a real difference. It's so important. So bear for us. And thanks.

 I think it may be wise or helpful in a number of ways and for a number of different reasons to say a few more things after everything that we've said on ethics and soul making so far in the seed and soul talks and these image of ethics talks and emphasis on those words so far as I said to me they're endless subjects, endless inquiries and they really should be endless inquiries, an active process. So whatever I've said now as I think I said right at the beginning of the image of ethics talks just represents the snapshot of a process and evolution which I hope that others can when they've digested everything that's a sort of prerequisite up to now for soul making dharma, what they've done, digested soul making dharma practice and what's been said so far around ethics and I hope that there may be some people who can then contribute in a very careful and rigorous and intelligent and soulful way with integrity. Also moral integrity can contribute to the further evolution of the whole soul making dharma logos and in particular the branch, the area, the domain around ethics and soul making dharma. So what I'm going to say now is not really in conclusion, it's not really conclusive in a way, they're more, you could say, more preliminary marks. So could hear this more as an introduction to the whole image and ethics talks and some of what I'm going to say today is in fact just reminders of things I've already said but because there's been so much said it's easy to lose a lot of that. And part of the reason for giving this little extra piece now is because some people may have listened to seeing our soul and the image of ethics or other things with soul making dharma and feel quite confused or even concerned at what they are concluding other implications or probabilities that come out of what's been said. So I think it's worthwhile saying that. And also reminding, we try to, talks get put up on dharma seed, there's usually a sort of caveat, a warning, a sort of user guidelines sort of thing which says, you know, it's probably really not a good idea to listen to this until you've really digested x, y and z. And in the case of these talks and the senior soul talks, unless one has digested, really digested, I mean, not just intellectually but in practice as well, the principles of soul making dharma and the practices of soul making dharma. So not just played with them a little bit but really had a sense of, oh, this is what the authentic imaginal is like, this is the sense of it, this is the terrain. And listening to many of these talks before that will, you know, highly likely will only give a partial understanding, probably misunderstandings, etc. And of course give rise to all kinds of concern, etc. So anyway, so we put these notes up but I know for a fact that a good percentage of people just ignore them and go ahead and listen because it looks like an interesting title or whatever. Anyway, so first thing to say is, and this is something I've said before, just to really stress it again, I believe that any ethical system will be incomplete. It will have its strengths and it will have its weaknesses but it will always have its shortcomings and its inadequacies. And I think that applies to any ethical system that anyone, anywhere in the history of humanity so far has offered or come up with or established or guided, based their life on. And that includes whatever we've said so far about sensing with soul and soul making dharma practice as an approach to ethics, as forming a kind of ethical system. Any ethical system will be incomplete, will have its strengths and weaknesses, its places where it doesn't reach far enough or it's inadequate. And that includes soul making dharma approach to ethics, it includes a sensing with soul. So it's really, really important to understand that, not just about what's been offered to what I've said so far around ethics but around any system, any ethical system. And I include absolutely the Buddhist ethics and particularly the Buddhist five precepts. It's wonderful, fantastic and it has its shortcomings and inadequacies, has its strengths and its weaknesses. And I would even extend that to where people keep more precepts, 10 precepts or the monastic Vinaya with whatever they have, 236 precepts or whatever it is in the Theravada monastic Vinaya. And still with all those precepts, all those laws and rules that they can't break, all those guidelines, still there's the current, you know, and feels like totally entrenched and unquestionable current of patriarchy there. You see that reflected in the whole battle around validating non-sordination, the general tenor of patriarchal hierarchy etc that runs through that. Many, many other places, many other manifestations in the monastic life, in the monastic Sangha, despite all those precepts. So I include sensing with soul, soul-making dharma and practice as an approach to ethics, as a system for ethics. It's not going to be perfect but neither are the precepts and the approaches of buddha-dharma, I would say. And one of the issues with buddha-dharma and the five precepts is it's... and the idea of just... we're just reducing suffering. As a Buddhist I'm just interested in reducing suffering, that's what I care about. That's the primary thing, that's the orientation of my life, that's how we think about everything. It's actually, with those two things together, the primacy of view, that the primary intention is to reduce suffering, suffering of self and other all beings, the bodhisattva, and everything. That view and the five precepts. It's very easy then to go into a kind of complacency, or a kind of complacency to take over. Oh, sort of sorted, the ethics are sorted, because I've got the five precepts and I've got this intention as a Buddhist to reduce suffering and that's the most important thing. Very easily to kind of do that, just tick the box of ethics and sealer. And that's done, that's done. I don't need to... all I need to do is just take care that I'm keeping the precepts. And the whole philosophy of it is done and the whole, I don't really need to think about it much anymore. And there's a kind of complacency, or there are kinds, plural, of complacency that come in. They're very very dangerous, very very, I would say, common within the world of Buddhism. So lots of issues with the five precepts as a kind of approach to ethics, lots of shortcomings. It's not only, the shortcomings are not only in the fact that people interpret the precepts very differently, hugely differently. The fifth precept about substances, alcohol, the third precept about sexuality, heaven knows what people do with the fourth precept on speech. It gets interpreted very very differently, vegetarianism etc, so many different interpretations. And again what does that show us? What does it imply? There's all these different interpretations, yet we feel secure in the notion of the five precepts that we're on the right track ethically. And nor is it only because, you know, lots of so-called Buddhists break the precepts all the time, all the time, or quite frequently. And nor is it only either because many Buddhists in power, as we've been hearing about and reading about in the news recently, has come to light, been exposed. Many Buddhists in power are actually abusing their power and breaking the precepts in doing so. That's not even the only issue with, that's not only the reason why we need to wake up a little bit and expand things around the whole conversation about ethics, why the five precepts are not enough. Nor is it only that, or even in addition, that something in the Buddhist precepts, and as I've talked about before, and in the kind of archetypes that rule over and through Buddhism, but are not kind of consciously recognized as archetypes and images that are ruling over Buddhism, equanimity, gentleness, non-harshness, that kind of kindness, all these kind of images of what awakening looks like, of what a good Buddhist looks like, that are often kind of semi-conscious. Semi-conscious is the power of that typical Buddha Rupa image, sitting cross-legged meditatively with his eyes shut, very still, very calm, very not engaged. I've talked about all this before, and what that does together, we've got the five precepts and these kind of not really recognized in their power and their pervasiveness and what they do, images, archetypes, running through and ruling over Buddha Dharma and its practitioners, and what comes out then sometimes is a sort of passive aggression, for instance, in speech, communication, because actually good Buddhists don't get angry and raise their voices, but what comes out is a kind of more plenty of room left there for passive aggressive abuse of power, passive aggressive communication, etc., etc. When people are getting upset, kind of super-siliously looking at them as if, well, that's you're not really practicing well right now because you're not being really equanimous and calm, etc. But even all those put together, all those reasons, people interpret precepts differently, they break precepts, people, Buddhists in power abuse precepts together with an abuse of their power, there's a kind of passive aggression that plenty of room space is left for in a kind of Buddhist shadow. Not even all those together, important, and they are really important, issues and questions, but it's just the fact that the precepts are not enough as ethical, as I'm going to say, as ethical guidelines, but what I really mean is as an approach to ethics, as a way of thinking about ethics, as a way of taking care about ethics, they're just not enough, I would say. Certainly, you know, one of my teachers would very much disagree, but I would say they're just not enough. Take not harm's addition to each of the five precepts of adding a kind of positive version, not just to take what's not given, but to practice generosity, not just to not harm life, but to practice kindness, etc. This is, you know, really, really valuable, really valuable, really helpful, I think, in terms of opening things up further in a way that they need to be opened up. And for some people, that will be enough. That's enough. Well, that feels like it's enough. It's one approach to opening things up larger, but I still think, as of, you know, now, I don't know how many hours with the senior and soul talk and the image of ethics, but I still think there are larger questions here that need looking at, that need investigation. Precepts are actually not values. So we talk about them as training guidelines, and that the actual Pali is, I undertake the training guideline to refrain from whatever it is. That's the translation of the Pali, of the precepts. I undertake the training guideline, the training rule to undertake, try to do this as a training rule. So it's very different from thou shalt not. But I would say they're still not values. A precept formulated like that is not a value. It's not a commandment either. It's somewhere in between, but it's actually more like a rule or a commandment than it is like a value. Now, certainly there are values wrapped up in or implied or suggested, or we bring a sense of what values may be wrapped up in or implied or suggested in any of those five precepts. But actually it's not very clear. They're wrapped up in them. But if you think, think your way, I'm not going to unpack it for you. Think your way through this. Yes, values are implied. What values? What values are implied? And what are the limitations in terms of just connoting or pointing to that value just through the formulation of a precept? It's not clear. It's simply not clear. So I'll come back to this about the precepts. I'm going to say, I don't think they're enough. And one of the indications that they're not enough, as I've started talking about in the Metastators' Revolutionary and Necessity of Fantasy, one of the indicators that they're not enough is just if we ask the question, why is it that Buddhists came so late to the party addressing climate change? Why so late? And I mean that as a real question. There's a real question there. Not just a criticism, why, why so late? But really, why? What was it? Or what is it in Buddhist practice and teaching and thinking and formulations and the way we think about ethics and we frame ethics and the limitations of the way we think about ethics that meant that probably of all the major religions, it was contemporary Buddhism that was the latest in really stepping up. Thankfully, it's really beginning to change now. But it's taken quite a lot of work by a number of people. But this is a real question. Why, why so late? Why were the Christians already there first and others? What was going on? I'm repeating myself now. What's going, what was going on? What was there in the way that we were thinking about ethics and thinking about practice and thinking about liberation and thinking about the world that actually that wasn't picked up and some of the teachers went into it, for example, by David Law here years ago. Some of them like Joseph were just honest, honest enough to actually really question. So yeah, that's interesting. I don't know why haven't I thought about that. And even then the galvanization is slow, slow. Even when it's pointed out, why are we not thinking about it even then slow. So there's a real question there. And this is part of my, is it enough just to fall back on the five precepts, just to rest on the kind of presumed safety, the presumed laurels of the five precepts. Someone asked, you know, why don't we have the five precepts as a ceremony, when we begin soul making retreats, you know, and that would help me feel safe, etc. And I think this is something we really have to listen to. Hopefully in future soul making retreats, we can, we can do that and create a space at the beginning of retreats there for a ceremony to really invoke and kind of establish the five precepts and give them give them a really central and sacred place. But to me still, I think that's important. And for some people, it will help them feel safe. And that's important. It's important that people feel safe. But to me, there would be a grave, grave era and a grave shortcoming and a grave kind of disservice to both the Dharma and certainly to soul making Dharma, if we just stopped there. Okay, that's the ethics piece that we're resting on. It's not enough. So yes, I think it might be important to establish that as a ceremony, future of trees, we can think about that sometimes. There's so much to get through that it gets squeezed out is also the case. You know, Guy House that we have a kind of legacy, because of certain teachers over since Guy House was created, there was a real kind of tenor of frowning on ceremonies and not having any ceremonies for anything at all. So at Guy House, we're a little, a little battling that history and legacy. So even to have the ceremonies that we do is already sort of pushing the envelope. But I think that might be important because it is important that people feel safe. However, it's not enough. It's really not enough. So I think if we do have a ceremony, it should be also seen that it's a preliminary. And I was thinking recently, you know, just in terms of how do people approach the area of ethics and its relationship to soul making Dharma practice. So often with Buddha Dharma, you know, you get taught the ethics first and say, okay, let's agree to that. And then you practice. Ideally, that's what you do. Here's the five precepts. And then you practice. And as I think I shared once, that's how it works for me. I just heard them first Dharma talk ever. It made complete sense. Just immediately took them on, changed my life quite drastically, and then got into meditation immediately after that. Now, for a lot of people, that isn't the case. But still, I think it might, and I'm not sure if this is right, so I'm kind of thinking out loud here, it might be that that is for many people, the start of soul making practice. They come to soul making practice through other Dharma practice. And soul making Dharma practice, just like other Dharma practice should be resting on, and should be really taking for granted the care for and the adherence to the five precepts. And I think I said that in a podcast interview, maybe a couple of times with a couple of different interviews. So rests on the five precepts. Absolutely. Maybe we should make that a little more clear. So that's a beginning. And then one starts already has a basis in the five precepts and a basis in everything else that we usually ask for before people come on soul making Dharma retreats. Mindfulness, insight, meditation, samadhi, some understanding of emptiness, certainly, metta and things like that, and energy, body, mind, etc. Number one begins practicing and developing one's soul making practice, one's imaginal practice. And then one starts to see, oh, soul making practice, because values are one of the elements of the imagine, they actually implied and involved inextricably in any imaginal practice in any sense of soul making, even if it's an extra psychic image with a sensing soul with a tree or with a with a landscape or with this whatever it is. Ethics are involved. Again, with the elements, it's almost sometimes you have to notice and oh, I didn't even notice that at first. That element, it's like your eyes getting used to the dark. Oh, there's that there as well. Like I don't notice that I'm being loved or whatever it is. So these elements, it's like one really has to get used to the terrain of soul, the landscapes of soul and the landscapes of the imaginal. And then one starts to realize not only are values there, but actually, inevitably, soul making practice will start expanding, not contracting, the range of ethics and the care for ethics, but actually expanding it, making it larger, more, certainly deeper and richer, but also wider, a greater range. I've talked about this before, we're at the gaps in just the five precepts and start expanding the whole notion of what an awakened being looks like and talks like, what are the dominant archetypes, that are operating and running things and ruling things and sending things only down certain channels and expressions and activism only down certain channels of this is what they look like, this is the tone, this is what we do, etc. This is what we don't do. It starts to wake up to that and expand the range there. More becomes permissible in one's ethical stance, in one's ethical response and one's ethical actions and also the whole nature of the world. That starts to expand or maybe I'm responsible for more ethically here because the whole nature of the world becomes alive. So that may be a second stage. The first stage is here, just the five precepts as usual, alongside your regular insight meditation practice and what you know from there. Those are two platforms you start practicing and through the practice itself, I mean through having proper, genuinely, genuinely, imaginal experiences and working with that, grappling with that, listening to teachings and trying to understand, having a range of sensing the soul experiences and all that, then something you will see something expands, doesn't contract, expands. There's more demanding ethically, there's a greater range. So that would be the second stage. And then at the third stage, at some point, with enough practice through lots and lots of practice experience and with sensing the soul and imaginal and soul making dharma and lots and lots and more thorough and deep understanding, practice experiences and understanding, we start to, I think inevitably, we will reach a point where we trust enough in soul making dharma and practice that we trust that sensing the soul can actually become a basis for ethics. Through, as I've described in this image of ethics, through a sensing the soul with regard to values, to virtues, to ethical choices and situations. So there's three stages there. We're not starting with the third stage of asking someone to kind of buy into some whole ethical system that might sound very odd or strange or might raise some concerns. So you're not asking them to buy into that before these other stages. So I don't know, as I say, I'm thinking out loud here. I'm wondering about order, what the order is. People often ask me just in what order should I listen to talks in, what order should I, and so I'm thinking out loud. I don't know what the order is for sensing the soul practice for soul making dharma. But that might be one way of thinking about it, or just these three stages. Very different from putting the ethics in the soul making dharma, sort of understanding ethics, putting that first. That would be kind of ridiculous because people wouldn't really know, have an ability to do that or know what we're talking about, would easily be misunderstood, misinterpreted, all kinds of things. So there are lots of questions about this. What's the order? What's a prerequisite for soul making dharma practice? And so one question we still have, I don't think it's quite resolved, it's exactly how much real understanding of emptiness should a person have before they really get into soul making dharma. And I've said just briefly a sort of secondary comments. You know, I'm not sure yet, I'm not sure yet, but in several conversations there are people who think, I think, you know, one really needs to have a quite a deep understanding of emptiness, or quite a sure understanding of emptiness. And I mean emptiness as I teach it, that really thorough emptiness, not just a little bit about, you know, the sort of, whatever it is, emptiness is impermanence or aggregates in time. You know, that's also a question, it's a parallel question. How much emptiness practice and understanding do people have? Should we stipulate or even demand that people have before they do soul making practice, maybe before they're even allowed to hear soul making teachings? I don't know, these are all open, open questions. I'm really not sure yet. So some may have heard in the totality of the ethics talk so far, the seeing and soul image of ethics, you know. Well, here this thing about hierarchies of values, for instance, and I don't like the idea of lower versus higher. So a few things about that, you know, remember, and perhaps I didn't make this clear, sufficiently clear at all on the seeing and soul talks, but Hartman was really addressing a different question than, say, Kant. And we are prone these days, as I'm trying to make very clear on the image of ethics talks, we are prone these days to approach ethics with immediately the question of what's right, what's wrong. This is what I want from an ethical system. I want a stipulation about what's right and what's wrong. And Hartman actually said, no, the fundamental question is what is of value? And that's a bigger question. What is really good with the capital G? What is the good as the ancients used to talk about as what is a life that's really worthwhile? What is the beautiful life? And that's a bigger question than what's right and what's wrong. Now, before you can answer the question, what's right and wrong, what should I do? What ought I to do in this or that situation? You have to actually answer and look at the larger question of what is of value. It's not so much replacing one question with another, but providing a ground, a wider and deeper ground for the question, what ought I to do with the wider and deeper question, what is of value? And then this whole question, or this whole exploration of a hierarchy of values is necessarily called in. But when we ask that bigger question, then the question of what's right and what's wrong sits within that bigger question. And I hope that's something that the image of ethics talks makes clear. And the fact is we do have hierarchies of values. You have them anyway. So again, it's just a bit like the soul making Dharma and practice stuff. It's just making clear what goes on for us as human beings anyway. Soul making Dharma in relation to heroes, when we really love something, and in relation to ethics, when we make ethical choices, when we're arguing with someone about right and wrong, and it's not just stuck argument, we actually have hierarchies anyways. In a way, we're exposing something and asking if we need to talk about this, because it's already there. And we need to talk about it because actually we need to expand the conversation, the range of conversation. What are we trying to actually ask and address and inquire into? What's the fundamental question here? So the person says, I don't like this idea of a hierarchy of values. Okay, well, we'll think back, for example, to Augustine's hierarchy and the example he used or the example we used or an example he used. And he says, justice compared to gold. He said, these are both wonderful things. They both have value. They're both part of God's creation. And as such, both of them should be loved. But for Augustine, it's clear there's a hierarchy here. Justice is, has a higher value than gold. And we should orient that way. We should appreciate the hierarchy of values and love justice and gold according to their place in that hierarchy. In other words, we should love justice more than gold. Gold, you know, personal profit. No one can say, oh, I could use that personal profit for justice. Okay, but the point he's making here is for personally used material gain. So if you think you don't like hierarchies of values, then just use Augustine's example, you think Augustine's example. Do you really disapprove of the idea that it's better to love justice over your personal profit that you would use for your personal use? Most of us, even if we find it hard to live up to sometimes, would say justice is the higher value. There's a hierarchy there. And we would agree with Augustine maybe that we should love according to that hierarchy. We should love justice over our love and our desire for gold. So this is the kind of thing that's been pointed to, and just to ask yourself if you have this objection to a sense of hierarchy, do you object to that hierarchy? Or to take another example from Nikolai Hartman. So he has two values, the value of altruism and the value of egoism, of selfish interest, selfishness of interest. So they're in hierarchical relationship to each other. Altruism is the higher value, it's higher than selfishness of interest. Selfishness of interest is still a value, egoism is still a value, we need to take care of ourselves and our own needs. But how do we know there's a hierarchy there? Or how can you sense if you already feel there's a hierarchy there? That's the more important question. How does your heart respond to stories of altruism? Or when you witness great altruism, are you not moved and impressed? And how does your heart respond when you just see someone just taking care of their own needs? It may not even be at the obvious expense of anyone else. But the way these things touch our heart and impress on our heart, the way our heart responds, when we witness altruism compared to when we witness egoism, is already implying that we sense a hierarchy there. Now of course you may not. But I think a lot of people, maybe it's universal, maybe it's just a cultural thing that's come post Christianity. But my point is more for you to introspect a little bit here. And just see, is your heart not more impressed upon? More moved? Are you not more impressed when you witness altruism compared to when you witness just some example of someone just taking care of their own interests? Egoism. Okay, egoism. And Hartman adds to that, yes, there's a hierarchy here. But if it's completely utterly lopsided, and there's way too much altruism and almost no selfish interest, it's so imbalanced between those two hierarchies that it borders on stupidity and dysfunction. So yes, there's a hierarchy, but still there's a qualification that one is not at the complete expense of the other. Altruism is not the complete expense of selfishness, selfishness of interest of taking care of oneself with egoism. So there's a hierarchy, but it's got other considerations that are woven in to the sense of that hierarchy, if we want a kind of wisdom with regard to the hierarchy. And there may have been things, for instance, in the Sinner and Soul talks, or even in the image of Ethics talks, where, you know, talk about a certain value and it just doesn't resonate for some people. Of course not. So again, maybe I just didn't make this clear enough. But if certain values don't resonate, you know, they're just rarer values and they're not for everyone. So for example, what Hartman calls the value of nobility, noble-mindedness, in his sense of the word, very particular usage he has of that word in an ethical context and context of values and virtues that we talked about in Sinner and Soul. It really means for him the opening up of the kind of vision or sensibility or realizational capacities of the culture at any time, opening up the telescope lens wider, opening up the focus of the telescope lens wider as it looks on the firmament of values. Remember, every culture, every person has a limited scope and the noble-minded nobility with regard to values actually stretches that scope. Such a person begins to discern new values that the culture hasn't at that time hasn't sensed yet. Their antennae are more receptive. They're ahead of their time in a way. In much the same way that Christianity itself now has become such entrenched values, even if one isn't a Christian or isn't religious or objects to what our inheritance from Christianity and all the wrong that's been done and this and that, we've still absorbed so much from Christian morality. At its time though, it was a novel value, novel and noble in the sense that Jesus and the first apostles and disciples were really feeling into the ether, into the firmament of values and picking up on a new set of values or stretching of the values, love over law, the value of love over the value of biblical law, of Moses law. So at that point, those who were sensible to them preached that were embodying manifesting the value, the virtue of nobility in Hartman's sense. Now of course it's just totally old hat, as I said, but there's a value in nobility and some people have that calling and some people just don't relate to that at all. And again, if you talk about higher values or if I use that language, it does not mean a higher value is at the complete expense of a lower value. So for example, we're talking about love of the remote. Love of the remote really means love of those in the future but those most excellent in the future, those most likely able to offer something really beautiful to the world and really valuable to the world in the future. And caring for those people who one doesn't even know or meet, one might not even be sure if they get the message or etc etc. And then comparing that or contrasting that with love of one's neighbour, which is those around one everyday sort of interactions. And some people like Nietzsche almost discovering the love of the remote and prioritizing that to the complete expense of love of his neighbour. You know, I don't know, he went eventually went mad but it was probably a biological thing and illness, a physical illness that affected his brain. But anyway, it was a mistake. You know, and sometimes, in fact, as Hartman points out, sometimes people discovering new things get a little extreme at times. They're, you know, out in territory where no one else goes exploring ideas or creative projects and it's all little bonkers. And I think I know that territory a little bit from peers in my life. Creative projects that one feels very alone with and yeah, gets a little mad. Anyway, the point is, if we make a hierarchy between those values, love of the remote is not absolutely not at the complete expense of love of the neighbour and to prioritize it at the complete expense of love. That would be a mistake. And secondly, it's not for everyone. That one, we could talk about other values, they're just not for everyone. It's fine. We're just talking about things that, you know, for some people, it might make more sense of why do I feel like I can't quite fit into the sort of taken for granted ethical system. I seem to be caring about something else. I can't quite articulate it. So putting out a teaching like that may be helpful for those people who will almost certainly be in a minority, but who have been grappling with trying to make sense of their own life and their choices. And they seem to be sort of not completely, you know, doing what the sort of standard ethics would suggest that they do. I was like, oh, okay, we need to expand our thinking here. And it's not for everyone. And so if it's not for you, just leave it. We could give lots of different examples here. But more, even more importantly, I think now from the image of ethics talks, it should be clear, again, that it's not in the thing itself. That eventually we can just use the soul making sense as your guide. So it's not intrinsically, so to speak, for example, if we take that as a love of their own is higher than love of one's neighbour or whatever. It's not intrinsically in the thing itself, right? We've emphasised this several times when we talked about the ontology of values in the image of ethics talk. It's more that if I personally or you personally have developed your soul making practice, you start to get a sense of is this or that value soul making to you. Some people were here about certain values. It just doesn't resonate. It never will resonate. And for other people, we start to really get a sense of the soul is really called in a certain direction. And again, even if it is, it doesn't mean to follow that call or to prioritise that call at the complete expense and at the total disregard of another value that might seem lower in your personal soul making sense of hierarchy there. So this is really important. But if eventually one can use one's own personal soul making sense, and that's different than decreeing that this is for everyone, the so-called higher value, and that is for everyone, a so-called lower value. Again, I'd be repeating myself. That sounds alarming. And you think, oh, so it can just be anything you like. Any whim, you can decide what's higher or lower value. Then if one thinks that at this point, you haven't understood yet the discipline and the demands of soul making practice and understanding the discipline and demands of a disciplined Eros, disciplined sensing with soul. And again, to repeat, we're putting out, exploring, unfolding, supporting ethics with a different ontology and a different epistemology, different than Hartman's, and different than usual ontologies and epistemology that we're used to. Certainly different than the usual one of modernity or of postmodernity or of premodernity. We've gone into this before. But as I said, even that might sound alarming to people. Let it go for now if it sounds alarming. It's really important to trust your concerns and leave what sounds alarming or what you don't like or better, discuss it with others. Really discuss it. And it might be that you leave that part alone. Just leave it. Just go back to what you feel comfortable with ethically. What makes sense and actually what really makes sense to you more than feel comfortable. It's like you need to be, we need to be stretched and challenged with ethics and not necessarily comfortable. But I mean, what feels that you can trust ethically. Leave it. And if you're still really attracted to soul making practice, get into the soul making practice. And it's probable that that evolution that I was talking about before, those three stages, you'll start to realize, oh, now the soul making business is opening up my whole ethical outlook and questioning and sensibility and ethical demands on me and the range of that and the range of expressions and all that. And then eventually it will mature even more and you will feel that you can trust your soul making sense with regard to ethics. And you will feel hierarchy values, but it's your personal hierarchy values and you will feel that you can trust that. There's no danger again. So everyone can decide for themselves that this mass murderer could just decide that this is how we've been through all that. But if it's alarming for you, now it just means you're not ready for it. Just leave it, put it down, come back to what you feel you can trust, both ethically and in terms of practice. And if you feel drawn to soul making, just get into it. And if you really develop it, if you put the time in and you love it and it develops, at some point there will be these stages of evolution that will open up and transform your relationship with ethics and ethical questions and ethical issues. So really important, I think, to establish the imaginal practice first, practicing with the imagining the soul, soul making, sensing the soul practice first, if you want to, you know, if you want to, if you feel called that way. And so establish that first before you can really even properly, I think, for most people, probably even assess these whole teachings about ethics now. And I really mean imaginal practice. I don't just mean the use of the imagination in meditation. And I mean more than just, you know, some images coming or working with some images in meditation or in therapy or somewhere else where that image has felt very healing, perhaps psychologically or whatever. I really mean imaginal in the sense of we try to outline the aspects, the elements of the authentically, the genuinely imaginal with all the elements and with all the ways it spreads and all that business. So really establish that first and really get, as I said, familiar with that whole landscape of the imaginal. And you see, oh yeah, there's values implicit there. And some of them, just the fact of what values are implicit, are actually expanding and making demands and stretching your ethical range and sensibility and inquiry. And there's the fullness of intention there. It's not that we're in the grip of some selfish intention. The fullness of intention is an ethical safeguard that goes with it. And there's the imaginal made away. We're not reifying, we're not concretizing, mistaking images for reality and acting on them sort of indiscriminately. And there's a distinction between eros and craving. Craving always wants to possess its objects, always needs to have more and that more spreads horizontally as we've been talking about, want to possess more and more objects, more and more experiences at the risk of disregarding ethical concerns. I don't care. And it's not even, I think I don't care, I just don't see. This is what craving does when it's not allowed to become eros. Eros, as we talked about, opens up the imaginal, the vertical dimensions. It can get the more it wants in this endless opening up of one image. It doesn't need to have more objects, possess them concretely. It's getting what it wants through that opening up. And the duty, again, it's not literal, but it's refracted, refracted into life. So even the dark images, you know, there's images of killing and sacrifice and drinking blood and rampage and, you know, whatever it is, they're refracted into act or speech. They're metaphorical. The image can stay what it is, but it refracts into something that ostensibly doesn't even look like it. So I can see, you know, all those soldier warrior images that I used to have, how they have been refracted into my life through my teachings. My teachings have been, you know, one could say from a certain point, warrior-like, etc. I'm certainly not going to join the army, get a sword, hurt anyone physically or anything like that. So, you know, which I'm touching on something I said before, there's been a question with the whole soul-making teachings, really almost from the beginning, not quite, but almost from the beginning. I somehow felt a duty when I started teaching soul-making, the imaginal stuff, I somehow felt a duty in putting it out there in the Dharma context and shaking things up and asking questions and expanding things. And I felt a duty in doing that, a soul duty in doing that. But quite quickly there came a question and Catherine and I returned to this question quite regularly. Should these teachings be freely available? Talking about the whole soul-making Dharma teaching, the imaginal teaching, they're just there on Dharma seed, free, literally freely available. Anyone can listen. It's just open on the internet, you don't need to do anything, you just need to click on a button and you can hear all this stuff. And is that appropriate? There's a number of reasons to ask, is it appropriate? Should they be freely available? Or should there be a whole series of preliminary stages that we demand require people to go through? Not even just suggest they go through, as we sometimes do, but demand that they go through before they can even listen to any teachings. Qualifications that they need to have to have access to the teachings and practices like it used to be in, for example, Tibetan Tantric teachings, and as much less so these days, but still a little bit so. Before you can hear certain teachings, before you have access to the teacher, before you know or given any practice instructions whatsoever. So that's still an ongoing question. I'm not sure, I don't know. But I'm just sharing that this is a question that has been around for a while now, and that we take very seriously as a real ongoing question. And historically, the same thing with regard to emptiness teachings. I think I share this. You look at the old Mahayana text and it says, don't teach emptiness to someone who's not excited about it, to someone who's not ready for it, etc. We do that these days. Certainly I do that, but I can see the wisdom in that teaching. What a difficulty it is when the person is not ready, and when they're not excited, and when they jump to all kinds of conclusions, just from hearing the emptiness teaching. I'm not even talking about ethics teaching, I'm talking about emptiness teachings. And one of the things they jump to is what I shared a couple of times in this series of talks. What does it imply about ethics? You know, that's what they hear about where emptiness might go. And then all that means I'm not going to care about anything. It means nothing matters. It means I'm not going to care about ethics because ethics must be empty or blah blah blah. And as we said, no, no, no, no, no, don't start at the end, start at the beginning. And the beginning is just these ideas about the flexibility of ways of looking. And there's this notion of fabrication. Both of them can start as really simple ideas. If a puncher is more fabricator than a normal consciousness, ways of looking, it's like, okay, just compare mindfulness to non-mindfulness. Just compare the way of looking that's come out of just some metapractic compared to a regular way of looking. Or when you're, or when you're feeling grumpy or angry or whatever, just really, really simple and take it from there. Take these two concepts, take these strands of inquiry, ways of looking fabrication, just take them for right and eventually see what they imply about ethics. And in that way of doing it, as we've said several times now, the ethics is woven in from the beginning. You can't not see it. It's unavoidable. It's inextricably woven in. And in that way of approaching the emptiness, there's never a division, a separation between so-called relative and absolute, relative truth and absolute truth. So in my Yara and Vajrayana teaching, they talk about the union of the two truths, conventional relative truth and ultimate truth. And in this way of practicing emptiness, it's entirely sort of, it's just obvious, as I said, inescapable central at every level of the exploration of emptiness using that approach, the ways of looking fabrication approach. So there's never any danger from the insights that come from that approach. There's never any danger of sort of choosing the absolute over the relative. So to speak, of trying to justify some behavior or action or speech or whatever through an appeal to the deeper truth of the absolute, of the emptiness or whatever it is or the oneness. So if we approach in other ways, emptiness or have a different understanding of emptiness, it means everything exists in the mind or it means all is one. Then there's danger that can creep in there. If everything is one, it's no problem, doesn't matter. What's doesn't talk about this for doesn't matter if even this person dies or this person is miserable or that whole ecosystem disappears, it's all one. You can't take away anything from the one. The one is infinitely one no matter what disappears. Or it's all in the mind, it means it's not a real thing in that sense. So there are issues around emptiness, but I think this way of teaching it has a really good safeguard because the ethics is integrated from the beginning. But again, just to say, these are questions and they are questions with some history if we look at the relationship of Buddhism and Buddhist teachers to teaching emptiness. You see that, as I said, even in thing if I remember, even in Prasad and Paramita texts, like core Buddhist texts, certainly in lots of other texts. I'm pretty sure Prasad and Paramita texts. So it's there with emptiness. Now we have the same kinds of question in terms of who to teach soul making Dharma to. Should this material just be freely available? With all the instructions and the examples and the Dharma sort of ideas and philosophy and now this business of that, should it just be freely available? I don't know. I mean, at the moment it is, but as I said, it's an ongoing question and so it is something we take very seriously. So there are there's lots in process now and there's lots that we're debating and thinking about as well. So I just wanted to share this and set at the beginning not conclusive remarks in conclusion, but more open-ended remarks, questions, and also in a way kind of preliminary remarks. But I hope that that's in some way helpful.

 when I talked right at the beginning of this talk on ethics, and it seems to me that any really valuable and viable approach to ethics nowadays would need the following things and listed seven or eight sort of items of a wish list and sort of been following through that thread through this whole talk and mentioned ontology and epistemology as one of the more considerations of around ontology and epistemology, explorations around ontology and epistemology. So I've already in this talk, in the parts of this talk, woven in questions of epistemology and ontology and ideas and possible new ways of thinking about ontology, epistemology and how that might be worked into older ideas to adapt them, modify them, open them out in a different way, allow them to deliver something that they otherwise would not be able to deliver to us today, etc. Of course I've talked a lot and written about ontology and talked a lot about it in previous talks and some of Sila and Sol was also devoted to ontology and epistemology regarding ethics, regarding values and virtues and all that. So nowadays in our postmodern culture, our culture of postmodernity, most people who think about these kinds of things, I think, like philosophers, would probably tend to agree that ontology, that it's impossible to come to conclusions around ontology, that it's kind of intrinsically inconclusive subject. But as I pointed out several times now here and elsewhere, ontology and epistemology are inevitable to our lives, to living our lives, to making choices in our lives, and they're also inevitable to any moment of consciousness, I would say, that we're always making ontological and epistemological assessments and judgements about what we sense, what we experience. And I've also said, so we can't really avoid it. It's there anyway and it's having an effect anyway, ontology and epistemology are there anyway, in any moment of our consciousness, certainly there in our life, certainly there in regard to our practice, our dharma practice, certainly there in regard to ethics in some way or another. And they're unavoidable, they're having an effect. They affect everything. They affect what we choose, they affect how we think, they affect our orientations. And the question is, or a question then becomes, always this question is like, well, what does the ontology and what does the epistemology that I am holding right now lead to? What does the ontology and epistemology that goes with my underpins, my dharma practice, what does it lead to? What does it open? What does it close? What does it bring? What does it deliver? And the same thing for soul making, dharma practice, etc. And soul making, dharma practice, we can only see different ontologies and epistemology, but always this question, what does it bring? Which is a different question. It's related by it's a different question than just, is it true? So we can have different attitude orientations to ontology, indeed we do, of course. And there's a whole range there. I think in this talk, what I really want to do is, in a way not, in terms of my aims, the scope of this talk is not too different from what I've done in the past, which is, I guess, three things really. One is just bring to light and mull over and discuss things, ontological questions and issues and epistemological questions and issues that we need to consider, that we need to at least acknowledge and realize. And just to bring them to light and acknowledge and realize them, see that they're in the picture and discuss them a little bit. Second thing is to, so to speak, elbow enough room philosophically from entrenched and usually unquestioned ontological and epistemological assumptions. So just people tend to believe, or we as human beings tend to just believe this or that about what's real or about what constitutes valid knowledge. And after many years of modern philosophy and dharma and modern physics, etc., a lot of that is no longer actually tenable as true, a lot of those old assumptions, those entrenched ontological and epistemological assumptions. They're not really viable. So that's the second kind of aim, to elbow enough room and enough space to be creative and to discover, to see if there are other ways, other ways forward, but also what might just be allowed because of that space, so that something is not being illegitimately strangled out, illegitimately prevented from taking a viable place in our life, in our consciousness, in our practice, in our view. So that's the second thing, just to elbow enough space. And the third is, yes, to offer lightly possible alternative ontologies and epistemologies. But I do say lightly, because this elbowing of enough room, the second kind of aim and this third aim of offering possible alternative ontology and epistemology doesn't equate to an assertion of any definite ontology or epistemology. Just doing enough that we can move forward, create, discover ontologies, epistemologies, attitudes that allow us to move forward, create and discover with regard to values, with regard to ethics, with regard to soul making. That means with regard to our lives, what's really important in our lives. So let's start with a few considerations. If we take a Buddha Dharma, and especially Pali Canon Buddha Dharma, the sense, the reading I have there is really that virtues and values, whatever you might call them, they have karmic effects. I'm not even talking about future lives, I'm talking about in this life, they affect the citta, the tenor of the citta, the quality of the citta, the perception of self and other, all that. And that's what's important. So the ontology is just that much ontology. Well, they have karmic effects, and that's what's important for Pali Canon Buddhism, for Theravana Buddhism, as it's most usually read. In the Mahayana, there's much more emphasis on the emptiness of phenomena, including the emptiness of qualities of the citta, including the emptiness of values and virtues and all that. And talk about the two truths, the ultimate truth of the emptiness of these things, and the conventional truth of their relative reality, the ultimate truth, relative truth or conventional truth, conventional reality. And as far as, so they are empty, there's values, virtues, all the rest of it, completely empty. It's emphasized and acknowledged and taught and studied. But at the same time, at the level of relative truth, the level of conventional reality, they function. They function. So there is a karmic effects from different values of virtues or vices or disvalues, so that the emptiness is in a way not so much an issue. The ontological fact or the emptiness of virtues and virtuous qualities of the citta is not so much an issue. In the Vajrayana, again there's a huge emphasis on the emptiness of these things. There's also, it seems to be this, in tantric texts and Vajrayana teachings, this depiction or teaching of a kind of encouragement to transgress against what is valuable and what is virtuous, etc. And that's a complicated subject but oftentimes the commentaries, most usually the commentaries explain that that transgression is really symbolic, that to kill your mother and father means so and so. It doesn't mean literally to kill your mother and father. Mother and father symbolizes this and killing them symbolizes that. So just like in the, well certainly in Pali Canon and Mahayana Buddhism, we could say the same from some looking down perspective. We could say or think similarly just what is the effect of values and virtues? What's the effect of relating to them, taking them seriously? And what is the effect of ignoring them, of just considering them empty? So that's the important question. Actually that question is not quite precise enough because the effect of virtues and as you've been following everything we've been saying in this talk, the effect depends on the conceptual framework of them and depends also on my relationship to them. Am I allowed and to what extent am I allowed an erotic relationship with values and virtues? And what is my conceptual framework? Does that conceptual framework give them a routing in another dimension? So we could actually, if we go further a little bit further, we could break down broadly the ontological approach in Buddha Dharma, not quite so clean cut but let's say two attitudes. One is just the, what are you getting in Pali Canon Buddhism or is it most commonly read? Certainly as it's read through the Upi Dhamma for instance in Theravada is the virtues and the values, these are real things, the virtues certainly are real things and or they're real component of a mind moment. So Upi Dhamma usually what it does is really categorize a whole, you know, a number and actually gives these many qualities of mind. These are the possible qualities of mind of any mind moment and they list them and there's a certain number and it's this number and not another number. So Upi Dhamma categorizes the number, a number of or the number of possible qualities of a mind moment but there, and that would be done by the moment and its mental qualities are viewed as real. They're viewed as inherent, inherently existing and it was this view of inherent existence that to which Nagarjuna objected in a little of his texts are really polemic attacks on that kind of reified view of the reality of virtues, reality of mind qualities in mind moments. But our question right now is what does such a realist view as we find in the Upi Dhamma, what does it do to our relationship with ethics and virtues and values? Because in the language that we've been using it is, it gives them reality, yes it's great, it gives a, you know, they're deemed very important but the whole thing is conceived of in what we would call a flat way, a mechanical way, almost a cold way. These things, these mind moments and these qualities do not have soft and elastic edges. There's something limited in that view and limiting. There isn't, it does not allow or allows very little scope for Eros or soul making in relationship to ethics. There's no real sense of dimensionality of infinity, infinitude. There's no, or it's quite a poor sense of the human being. We've touched on all this. But that would be kind of one end of a certain view, of a certain Buddha Dhamma view, just taking this kind of very realist view, quite a mechanical model. Another end would be just a kind of view of everything's empty including virtues and mind states and values and all that. It's all empty, ethics is empty too. So I think one of the things that's really important here is to question and, yes, question immature and to, any kind of immature or too hasty relativism regarding ontology and epistemology of ethics. Any immature or too hasty kind of nihilism regarding ethics. So we've touched on a little bit of this before, I think in the senior soul talks and also here. You know, several people have pointed out, including I think the philosopher W. Stays, just because people have not been able to conclusively prove an independent existence of ethics. It doesn't mean that there isn't an independent existence of values and of morality. So just to conclude that from the fact that so far human beings have been unable to do that, it doesn't actually logically follow. And similarly with a kind of scientistic view based on what's real is only what's measurable and material. And this kind of reduction of scientific view and there's no place in that for questions of value or feelings towards value. They're all just illusory. This is kind of just immature, partial, blanket thinking. Ethics exists for human beings. And as long as there are human beings in the universe, ethics has a reality because there are human beings. So just because it only exists for human beings doesn't mean that it doesn't have, that it has less reality. This goes back to Descartes and Galilee and all that. Or someone like the philosopher Richard Rorty, and we talked about him as well, and dismissing any ontology or epistemology underlying ethics and then just insisting what we need to do ethically is just keep the conversation going. We need to keep the conversation going. Well, why? Why do we need to keep the conversation going? That's an ethical assertion and on what are you basing it? But because he's ruled out from the beginning any possibility of basing ethics in anything else, in any other dimension or value-giving dimension, he can't answer that. So a lot of the time he just kind of talks in circles. And we can have a kind of similar immaturity in bringing the teachings of emptiness to bear on the whole domain of ethics. Actually, before I get onto that, it seems to me, and I probably said this elsewhere, it seems to me that those who emphasize, whether they're in the Dharma or outside of the Dharma, those who emphasize the impossibility of knowing any dimension or ground for ethics, for virtues, for values, are at the same time clinging, sometimes explicitly, more usually tacitly, to the classical scientific materialist view of reality. So very post-modern in the domain of ethics and other domains. But underneath that, or in other areas of life, just actually really clinging on to the classical scientific materialist reality, very not post-modern. So anything that Descartian, Galilean science posits or explains as real is real in this view. And anything else, for example, ethics or values, etc., is not. But we talked about Descartes. Actually, that came just from a decision in the first place. And Galileo also made a decision. It became a truth. But then eventually, even the whole scientific method, which they helped to start, ended up pulling the rug out of their starting modus operandi, their starting definitions. And we also pointed out how those definitions about what was real and how that scientific methodology over time started with people who were religious. Yes, Galileo was subject to the Inquisition or oppressed by the Inquisition, but they were still religious. Descartes was a very religious person. In fact, a lot of his so-called logic relies on the existence of God as part of the taken-for-god existence of God proves other parts of his logical edifice. There are all kinds of doubt, that is Descartes' skepticism. But actually, one thing he didn't doubt was the existence of God. Galileo and others lock. These were all genuinely religious thinkers. And what they started was rooted in and motivated even by religious thinking and religious aspiration to a certain extent. And then over history, as we trace a little bit in this talk, over history, following that thread about, okay, this is real and that's not, etc. And then all kinds of implications and consequences, including implications and consequences for ethics, unfolded through history over several hundred years. One step was taken and in turn, in time, implied another step, or together with certain social developments, implied another step, etc. But anyway, if we come back to emptiness, so really important to realize, knowing the emptiness of all things, understanding in one's heart the emptiness of all things, does not, will not lead to a nihilistic morality. It absolutely won't. That's not the way I understand. I've said this before. Emptiness means things are not real. It also means things are not, not real. Neither real nor not real. And to me, the indicator of insight into emptiness is care. It is even an increase in care. Care for others, care for the world. An indicator of insight is that the presence and even the increased felt sense of importance of values and virtues, the increased orientation to them, not a decrease, not a letting go and a negligence, an increase in compassion. These are the indicators to me of insight into emptiness. If that's not there and someone's talking about emptiness, I'm not interested, but if I'm in a teaching position, I'm very interested because something's really not right. Something's off. It's not, it's not the middle way of emptiness. And I would also say, and it's done in the way, at least I would teach emptiness and the practices that lead to it. So much sensitivity required and cultivated in that path of practice. And I think sensitivity too, including heart sensitivity and ethical sensitivity, all that will grow in the course of deepening one's insight into emptiness. So we've talked about a lot of this before. Sometimes people say, and they hear about the emptiness thing. Oh, oh, but then I won't, I won't, you know, everything's empty. So I won't care about ethics, etc. Just very briefly recapping what must have been, I'm assuming the first talk of this series, the talk on emptiness and ways of looking. And the way I would teach emptiness with, you know, via ways of looking and fabrication, we're not starting with asking anyone to believe the emptiness of all things. That would be really unwise. And usually then almost everyone would just say, but then I wouldn't care or then nothing would matter. They don't really understand it, not ready to jump to that level. Start with these two, two threads, the possibility of ways of looking, possibility of developing, flexibility of ways of looking, and the notion of the fabrication of suffering of self, of eventually of world of objects, etc. Start even just with the notion of fabrication of suffering and then have a look how the self is, etc. And just start with those two possibilities, which almost no one can deny and you explore and it's an open ended experiential, first hand experiential inquiry, rather than starting by believing something and then kind of acting ethically on this belief that I don't really understand. One does open ended mean one doesn't decide the limit of fabrication or one doesn't pre-decide that everything is empty, everything is an illusion. One doesn't know what that means yet. Secondly, we said, emptiness ways of looking, which you've developed lots of them, are just then different lenses, different ways of looking that we can pick up and put down at any time based on or responsive to the needs of the situation. What helps to reduce suffering here? If that's my intention, for self, for other, for world, etc. And we also said it might be in other ways of approaching emptiness through analysis or through intellectual analysis practice, as they do in the Gillub tradition in Tibet, or through the idea of some way of practice where emptiness gets construed as a sort of big empty space with substantial objects and not much self, or the sort of one kind of interpretation of a Theravadan view of emptiness as the machine-like process of aggregates. None of those, none of those three will automatically weave in, integrate, have integrated in them the understanding and the exploration of dependent arising, which is the exploration of karma, and how this intention, that way of looking, this way of acting, actually brings about this sense of self, this sense of world, this much suffering, this kind of suffering. We're seeing dependent origination and karma work right then when we're approaching it through the ways of looking, fabrication, way. So ethics is integrated unavoidably right from the beginning, karma is integrated unavoidably right from the beginning into the emptiness exploration, into the emptiness teachings, and it's something we see, know and feel first hand, and that runs all the way through, as opposed to teaching emptiness in some way and then somehow you have to kind of, now we have to stick back ethics in it because we're concerned that what we've done with emptiness might imply that ethics is irrelevant or we might have forgotten about it. Anyway, let's all repeat. But we need to be careful, you know, again, with the whole emptiness thing also not to be lazy and sloppy in as many ways we can make and certainly around the relationship of emptiness and ethics. So ethics are empty, therefore what? Just because there's no universal agreement doesn't necessarily imply that ethics are empty. That might even mean when I say ethics are empty, as we've already said. But even take something like killing is wrong. So ethics is empty, therefore it's not true to say killing is wrong or it doesn't apply. But it's just going into just even a little bit more carefully, we'll see that actually in relation to the notion of killing being wrong there's always in all cultures and societies what's interesting or if you like where the emptiness resides is in the question when is it deemed okay to kill? So it's not a blanket sort of sloppy just killing is wrong or no because ethics is empty and everything's empty, everything's okay. It's neither wrong nor right. It's in the detail. When is it deemed okay? You know, we put to sleep a pet that we love, there's the question of euthanasia, there's the question of what's it called assisted, you know, dignified dying assisted suicide when someone's terminally ill? Is it okay to kill when you prevent a murder or you prevent a mass murder or prevent someone like Hitler or you know all these questions. Is there such a thing as a justifiable war? You know, this is where it gets interesting and then just to say ethics is empty, it's still we can still say ethics is empty because those details are hard to work out and maybe not maybe we cannot arrive at a very clear final definite conclusion to some of these questions. That's where the emptiness resides. Or similarly, you know, again if you think everything's empty okay well is two plus two is four two plus two equals four is that empty of the truth? Is that empty of being true? So what's the whole relationship between truth and emptiness? You could say two plus two equals four is dependent on counting to understand it and you could even say two plus two is four in order to be a truth is dependent on the specification of the base, the numerical base. For example in what's that base ten isn't it? We call that but in base three two plus two equals what would it equal equal eleven? Two plus two equals one one. You could say two plus two is four is dependent on perception of two and perception of one etc. You could say all that but any of those qualifications and dependencies don't deprive the equation two plus two equals four of a certain inviable and inviable and non-empty truth and it may be similar with ethics. There may be lots that is dependent on individual or cultural perspectives and as we said on just the fact of human being. There are truths for human beings but it still might be the case that Hartman's firmament of values may have an absolute relatively independent existence reality truth to it. So two things here. One is that when we use the teachings of emptiness it's really important whether it's in regard to ethics and certainly in regard to ethics but also in regard to soul making and imaginal practice. To me it's important not to be sloppy and lazy. So that's one thing and the second thing is with regard to ethics you know that ontological and epistemological questions and issues and needs surpass what can be provided by just the notion that things are empty. So we said yeah for liberation emptiness is enough for lots of other things it's not enough as an ontology. We said that in one of the early talks of this series. And it also said ontology, epistemology, ethics, emotions, these areas of our existence and they are areas of our existence. They're not just philosophical areas. As I said ontology, epistemology, ethics, emotions, probably others, they are endless. I don't think humanity will ever come to an end of their exploration. And what did I say? You know if someone says I've figured them all out, I figured or any one of those, I figured ontology, I figured it all out, epistemology or whatever it is, run away from that person as a teacher. And if someone says you know don't bother, it's not interesting, it's not useful, it's a waste of time, there's no point, just ignore ontology and epistemology, I would run away from them as well as a teacher. So as we said you know really right from the beginning I think in the soul making Dharma teachings, ontology and epistemology or considering ontologies and epistemology and questions and issues there really support soul making. It really gives ground to opens up space for and also furthers soul making practice and soul making possibilities. Soul making needs ontology and epistemology and I would say ethics too. Actually by this point you might have got a sense that ethics is just a part of soul making. Soul making is an approach to ethics but ethics is definitely a part of soul making. Soul making therefore ethics needs ontology and epistemology, it needs us to turn that soil to mull over, to be creative, to discover, to question, to open up, to play and construct. And ontology and epistemology like ethics and the area of emotionality, all these areas, all these domains can themselves become erotic, imaginal objects for us. Our relationship to them in themselves can become soul making and soulful. So I think these areas are endless and I hope, my hope is that others, someone or some others in the future will sometime in the future will add to what we've been developing here and develop it further and build on it. I think we need to, certainly in soul making Dharma, again as ethics is a part of that, we need to, and I would say any ethics, we need to include ontology. It needs to be the inclusion of ontology. So I would say soul making Dharma needs the inclusion of ontology but let's say inconclusively. In other words in this open ended way. It might be the same with regard to anyone trying to move forward with ethics these days. The ontology needs to be included but in a kind of inconclusive way maybe. But in a way that's kind of, that kind of attitude to ontology and epistemology is kind of axiomatic to, fundamental to soul making Dharma. We can look back in history in the sort of, let's say the kind of literalism, ontological literalism of the belief in God in the ancient Judaic tradition. For example the Old Testament or that kind of ontology or Plato's ontology or Descartes or Galileo's ontology or Bacon's, which is very similar of course, or a kind of monistic materialism, this there is nothing but matter. Mind is really just material. That kind of ontology or the notions of truth that Karl Popper put forward etc. All of these over history seem to have flourished and then kind of run into problems, gone out of fashion, failed, fallen short in some way. And again we can have that sort of what in some postmodern circles becomes a kind of widespread view. So just forget the whole thing about ontology or we can say still we can move forward here, still we can play, still we can create and discover, still we can ask questions. So as I said regarding relative to ethics it's important that the ontology and epistemology is very related to the dimensionality. So it's the ontology and epistemology of dimensionality in part that's really crucial in the ethical question, the question of ethics. And it becomes important to establish, is that really the right word, to construct, create, discover, provide, explore, as I said elbow space for, against the sort of inevitable, against the usually default sort of indoctrination of ideas around ontology, epistemology. With regard to the dimensionality or whatever we're trying to, whatever ways we're trying to give dimension to values, to virtues, to ethics. So we talked, we spent a long time in the Sea-Loned Soul, Sea-Loned Soul talk of the Four Parables of Stone and Light series, the, we spent a long time talking about the notion of ideal reality or the realm of ideas, started with Plato. And Hartman, we spoke a lot about his moral philosophy and Hartman as picking up that the notion of ideal reality or the realm of ideas and values being a part of that, the realm of values being a part of the ideal realm, realm of ideas. And the ontology there and pointing out that as we said they exist for human beings, but that doesn't mean they're not real. Hartman would say just as geometrical laws exist just for spatial figures, physiological laws exist for organic, organic beings, well moral laws exist for human beings. So it doesn't take anything away from their reality. This geometrical law, it just is true. It exists, but it only exists for spatial beings. Geometrical law has nothing to say whatsoever about anger, for example. No geometrical law has anything to say about anger. So, and I can't remember if I said this in the Sea-Loned Soul talk, but for Plato and Hartman, the realm of ideas, which includes values, exists, has ontological validity, exists as a kind of reality. For Plato, the realm of ideas, the realm of forms was more real than any instantiation of that form. So beauty as a kind of ideal reality was more real than any material instantiation of something that was beautiful. And that's a very rare perspective and opinion and ontology these days. Someone at J. N. Findlay, who I've talked about in previous talks, he upheld that kind of inversion of the usual ontological hierarchy, that instantiations of things were less real than the ideal realm. Nice parallel that in the realm of mathematics and talking about the number pi and other things. And we also earlier in this talk talked about the possible etymology or phonetic relationship between the words virtue and virtual, meaning something that's an image of something more real and the thing itself is more real, the image is less real. So our virtues in the world are just an image, a copy, a not real copy of something that's more real, a real, a really existing virtual value. And virtually, the word virtually possibly being interpreted, connected, interpreted as connected by some things, it's not quite the real thing, it's virtually the real thing. We talked about virtual reality, that would be the image and virtually almost not quite the real thing. So Plato had this, what sounds to most people today, a very unusual ontology about this level of the realm of ideas being more real than the level of material reality and things and tables and horses or whatever it is. For Hartman, the level of ideal reality was less real, is still real, had a kind of reality but actually less real. Ideal being, he said, was a kind of thinner floating, insubstantial being, half being, so to speak, he wrote, which still lacks the full weight of being, being being what is material primarily. So in his view, there was a kind of hierarchy from of what was most real from inorganic being to and dependent on inorganic being, there was organic being, so dependent on chemicals, there is life, some kind of living organism, dependent on some, on there being a living organism, there is mental being and that's dependent on organic being and dependent on mental being, there is spiritual being. What he meant by spiritual being was the whole realm of language, ethics, morality, arts, religion, law, politics, philosophy, ideology, historical consciousness, etc. That's a lot of, that's what those guys primarily meant by spiritual being, those guys meaning Hartman, let's just say. However, that view that Hartman had has been brought into question, that hierarchy which most people would agree with, minus even his, most people agree, the most real thing is matter and kind of stacked on that hierarchy, you get things that are kind of real and then you get into this area where, well, it's sort of real but not really real and you get to the values and some people would really, a lot of people would disagree with that, do those have reality in themselves? Do those have an independent existence? So Owen Barfield, for his eyes, an example of a philosopher who would, who questioned that whole typical hierarchy of reality, ontological hierarchy that Hartman put forward and for instance in his Saving the Appearances, it's a well known book that he wrote, just really pulling that part really and again developments in physics, particularly in quantum mechanics, really questioning that order. It's worth pointing out too that Hartman really was quite strong in his criticism of Plato's hierarchical ontology there because for Hartman he thought that Plato's idea that if the ideal realm is more real, if the forms, these divine forms are more real than the things of this world, he thought that kind of philosophy will only lead, can only lead to devaluation and disregard of this real world, of what is, Hartman thought that this is real. If you believe some other realm is higher and more real, this is kind of illusion, it can only lead to a disregard of this world and it's possible, it's possible it can and that it has even that kind of philosophy, it has fueled that kind of attitude at times in history. But when this world is the only thing that's real and it's viewed in those material ways and it's the only thing that's real, then we've seen how, what are poor ethics that can eventually deliver or leave us with. Actually, the notion that there's an idea of the ideal realm, that there are a suspension, these are the attributes of God, these are the divine intelligences, the divine angels and that in a way they have more reality than this world, this world is just an image or it's just images and refractions of them. Or even that this world is completely real too but somehow has its origins in that ideal realm. It's not necessary, it doesn't necessarily follow that there's a devaluation of this material world and the things of this world at all. Actually, quite the opposite, it can be that because things reflect and have their roots in the divine and the divine attributes in this realm of ideas, that there's a greater sanctity to the things of this world. Even for someone who's a kind of very secular minded, like you imagine a physicist and thinking this way about how everything has its roots in the mathematical laws of equations that rule the universe, that govern the universe. There is very often a kind of sanctity that that level has in itself, that ideal realm of mathematics but also in a sanctity that then bestows a kind of level of sanctity that bestows on the material things of this world, the everyday things that we encounter. So I disagree with Hartman that it necessarily demeans the things of this world and there will be a disregard and a devaluing of them. It's so often portrayed that way and just taken as a sort of, well obviously Plato's ideas would do that and lead to that. I really think this is one of the things we should question in terms of the implications of any particular ontology. So difference between Plato and Hegel there and just staying with that physics thing for a while. So if a quag, a supposedly fundamental particle, is only a thing for observers, it only becomes a thing in any sense that we would use that word thing, like as being somewhere at some time and having certain properties like certain mass or certain direction and velocity and occur, you know, all that. If a quag is only a thing for observers and kind of in itself really there is only this ultra complex multidimensional mathematical idea really. Then two things. One is again that would be an instance of a sort of ideal reality having an ideal level, a level of idea, the mathematical idea, kind of having more reality than the actual instance of the quag which only comes into apparent reality when there's an observer there. And indeed there are some physicists today who say that in a way only those mathematical laws that govern the universe, they're the only things that are real. Matter is not real in the way we understand it. What's real are the mathematical laws. Space and time and all that. What's real are the mathematical laws. So there's that view, that's one thing. The second thing is, if this quag is only a thing for observers and in itself it really, all there is is this complex, ultra complex multidimensional mathematical idea, then the assumed ontological comparison with the reality of hard matter is softened. I mean at the very least it's softened. A similar thing when we have talked about emptiness as providing a kind of minimum ontology for justifying soul making, or justifying imaginal practice. Oftentimes images will get dismissed ontologically very quickly. There's something in the back of the mind saying, oh yeah but it's not real. And an image is held in comparison with something that is assumed, like whatever at this table, assumed to be really real. So at a minimum we say well the emptiness of all things takes away any really real. Yes, as we said before, there's an ontological difference, it's a different ontic status between this table and an imaginal table. Perhaps, but as a minimum what one's doing is taking away or reducing, dissolving a kind of backdrop, backdrop object and objection to taking images seriously. And then I don't know enough about Hegel's philosophy, but it might be that some interpretations of Hegel actually allow the level of idea to have a kind of more fundamental reality, but it involves the material and it plays out in the movements of the material and the movements of politics and the movements of all of that. So perhaps different interpretations of Hegel also may provide different configurations or reworkings of this whole ontological hierarchy question between ideal being and so-called instantations of ideal being or reality as we usually think of it or material being etc. But that might be something else to pursue, I don't know enough about Hegel's philosophy and I know that there's very different interpretations but the little I know it could be quite interesting. That actually the ideal being has more fun fundamental existence. So again, if you translate that to ethics, the value has more fundamental existence than the instantiation. And in Hegel's idea the development of this value, the movement of this value, the history of this value is the primary thing and it subsumes, if you like, the material and the historical in that. But really what's happening is there's an evolution of a value at the level of idea. That could be one version of interpretation of Hegel in relation to all this. So again, we always have questions of epistemology regarding anything, material things, ethical things, meditative things as always. We can't get away from questions of epistemology. It's important to acknowledge, I think, even with regard to virtues and values and ethics, even if a person says, I ostensibly understand, it seems to ostensibly understand, it's difficult, it's impossible to prove the reality of values. Person has that view but they're still acting and choosing according to their values. And what I would like to add to that is Nietzsche said, well, yeah, most of that's just they're acting from indoctrination, from stupidity, from habit, etc. Their values are basically indoctrination, stupidity and habit. Pretty critical view. But what I want to say is we still act and choose according to our values. All human beings do. And it's not all because of fear and conformity. Something's happening in our choices, in our ethical choices regarding values. We're trusting something. What are we trusting as an epistemic authority? What are we trusting? I know this. I feel this way or I think or whatever it is. What are we trusting? And usually it's some sense, it's some felt sense, a moral sense, a conscience, a sense of nobility or beauty, some push or pull in the being, some sense of that. Could it be that anyway we're trusting something and what we're trusting is some sense and could it be that that some sense that we're trusting is maybe the very beginnings of a kind of sensing with soul, sensibility regarding values and virtues and the choices we make. So I don't know, is anyone entirely logical and rational in the substance and the basis of their ethical choices? Is there anyone who just kind of computes like a machine, people more or less? But I think there's always some sense, some moral sense. And some, I wonder if part of that moral sense has to do with the sense of what's noble, what's useful, something pulling me, calling me, something to which I push away from. And could that be that the sort of very in a very inchoate form, just the beginning, the germ, just a fraction, a portion of soul making sensibility with regard to values and virtues. We are trusting some sense and I would say we do have some hierarchical differentiation between different values. Contrary to what the Utilitarians would say or allow us or give any weight to and also those who just interpret the Buddha Dharma perspective as just saying, just reduce suffering, just reduce suffering. This just reduced suffering, this goal to reduce suffering or end suffering is usually for something else, even if I haven't articulated what that something else is, even if I don't realise that it's for something else. So when I gave the sort of thought experiment of that falling and then realising there's no ground, how that would be, just to imagine that everyone's okay with that, you've worked towards everyone being okay with that, just falling. The reduction of suffering is for something else in the end or let's say past a certain point of reduction of suffering, something that we feel is good in some kind of alternate way, worthwhile, beautiful, meaningful. Some people are scared of this idea, sometimes I've mentioned it to people who are very committed to this or they've heard me say it in a talk or something, maybe ending suffering isn't there or reducing suffering isn't the main thing or isn't the final goal or whatever and it seems like it really stirs, really bothers some people. But again, my invitation is to just have a look, have a look, sense in, feel in for that thought experiment works for you or something similar even if you're scared of the idea. See, is there not something else behind, underneath your concern and your efforts to reduce suffering and your focus on reducing suffering? Isn't there something else, another level? So it could be that already what's operating for us, even if a person has never heard of soul making or has heard of it and doesn't like it or doesn't practice it or whatever, it could already be that part of how we are navigating our ethical choices is actually in through the means of some very kind of inchoate and dimly sent version of sensing the soul of soul making practice with regard to ethics. It could already be that's what people are doing, we are doing. So is it possible to develop that? Ontologically there, epistemologically there, there's this, we're already trusting something. What are we trusting? How's it working in us? And is it possibly the case that what we're actually already trusting is the beginnings of soul making approach, but we don't know that language, we don't know that practice or another part of our mind objects to it, but actually that's already part of what's going on, part of how we're understanding epistemologically with regard to ethics and ethical choices and values. So maybe that's already the case and then maybe it's something that can be developed. We've already said, we've already considered a couple of times already the possibility of regarding Eros as epistemologically valid and as ontologically guiding and validating, as John Milbank wrote, giving it an ontologically disclosive status. That Eros, if we have a view of truth, not as a definite this or that and a final arriving point, but more as this journey of provisional truths, as it in fact is the actuality in science, as a journey of provisional truths, progressive stages of provisional truth. If we have that idea and how congruent that is with the way Eros works, Eros as what takes us, what galvanizes the soul making dynamic, which also means the perception of course of psyche, the sense of what we're in relationship with and the idea of it, the logos, and taking us more into depth. That's what the Eros is, what opens up the depth, what opens us up to the depth. And the successive openings, the successive disclosures of truth or reality, but truth and reality just conceived a little bit more maturely really or differently. So Eros as epistemologically valid and also as ontologically guiding and validating in terms of depth, but also in terms of direction, so that there's, I would say, there can be and there will be, with soul making practice, a trust of the kind of the compass needle, the orientation of Eros, not just that it will take me deeper, but also where it points, the direction. And all this is within the careful discipline of soul making to armour practice and sensibility. It's not just, oh, so truth can be whatever I like, or whatever you like. No, we're talking about a real discipline here and anyone who knows soul making to armour practice and really practice understands that, should understand that. It's a difficult training. It's asking a lot. It's even asking a lot of people who've done a lot of meditative training before. But again, I'm just wondering if actually what's going on for people anyway is the beginnings or the little, you know, very partial fragment of a small version of soul making sensibility, sensing the soul sensibility anyway in regard to ethics. Okay. Can we fill that out? Can we give it more ontological and epistemological support in our thinking? Elbow, morum and provide possible possible ways of conceiving the ontology and epistemology with support taking that further, seeing what it does. And we already looked at how soul making to armour can give alternatives or modifications or sophistication of the ontology and epistemology with respect to the dimensions or the ways of providing dimensions through the notion of cosmic order or volunteerism. We looked at all that already. What soul making to armour can come in and just re-think those whole possibilities and put them on different ontological and epistemological footing. It's interesting for Hartman, I was taken with this idea of a value firmament and its hierarchy, but as far as I could find in what he wrote, he just seems to state there just is an independent existence to the value firmament and its hierarchy, the firmament of values. It's just that we can't grasp it all at once and some people are not very talented at recognising and differentiating values. And it's like to compare, let's compare that kind of statement with, go back to Saint Augustine and something else he wrote in his text on the Trinity. He's talking here about his theory of illumination, the notion of illumination, where he really means that our minds and our hearts are basically open to the light of God, open to be illuminated by the light of God. They function through the light of God, the light of God, the light of the divine permeates our hearts and minds. See, and that's a beautiful idea, it's a beautiful image. And he writes, God is wholly everywhere, whence it is that the mind lives and moves and has its being in him, and therefore it can remember him. Not that it remembers him because it knew him in Adam, Adam of the Garden of Eden, or any other time and place before entering the life of its body, or at the time it was created and inserted into its body. It remembers none of these things, whichever of them really happened to it, they're all consigned to oblivion. It remembers him by turning towards the Lord, as to the light which in some fashion had reached it even while it had been turned away from him. This is the reason why the wicked too can think of eternity and make correct judgments of approval and disapproval about human conduct. What are the rules according to which they judge, but the rules which show everyone how to live, even though they may not themselves live according to them? How do they know them? How does a wicked person realize what's right and wrong? Certainly not in their own natures, for although undoubtedly it's by the mind that these things are seen, it is clear that their minds are changeable, whereas whoever perceives in his mind these rules as the standard of conduct also perceives them to be unchangeable. Again, there's this notion of eternal, independent, objective existence of these values and ethical rules. Again, it is not any disposition of their minds, their minds are the wicked, that they're able to do this, since the rules are rules of righteousness, whereas their minds are, ex-hypotheses, the whole basis of what we're saying is their minds are unjust, so it's not through righteousness. Where then are these rules written? Where is it the unjust can discover what is just? Where do they see what they ought to have and lack? Where are the rules written but in the book of that light which we call truth? Here it is that all the rules of righteousness are inscribed and it is from here that they pass into the heart of the just man, not by bodily transfer, but as they're leaving their imprint on him, just as the design of a seal, like a wax seal, is impressed in the wax without leaving the seal. So again, I don't know how all that language lands with you. I know some people will really object to it for lots of different reasons. I don't have that history, so I find it very touching, even though I may not agree with all of it, and I can really understand how a lot of people are wounded through certain histories and then that language really turns them off. But for me, there's something very beautiful there, this idea of a sort of an absolute light of God. As we were talking about the light of the prison the other day, there's an analogy and then the attributes of God, like the refraction, the refracted light, the different wavelengths of different colours and the beauties of those different colours, and this idea of that light permeating our soul, permeating our mind, so that it's accessible to us and the values are eternal because they're part of that light and they're accessible because that light permeates our consciousness, permeates our being. But it's interesting, I just want to pick up a line there, because to me it's actually ambiguous what he means. This is the reason why the wicked too can think of eternity and make correct judgments of approval and disapproval about human conduct. So does he mean by think of eternity, mean think of hell for example, and the punishments that await them and then fearfully repent? Or does he mean by think of eternity something much more congruent with soul-making dharma, contemplating the timeless or having a sense of the timeless in some way or other? And that sense of the timelessness opens up a sense of dimensionality, of divinity, of soul-making etc., which opens up the sense of the soul, which naturally opens up the sense of the ideational, imaginal and the dimensionality and divinity of values and virtues. So I don't know, does he mean that? Does he mean actually timelessness? Eternity in that sense? Or does he mean think of eternity and eternal punishment and eternal reward? I have no idea, actually I don't know if it is work to know. But even if he meant eternal punishment and reward in that sense, we could again, soul-making dharma could modify what he wrote there and take the beautiful idea, this idea of something that is absolute in this sense of beyond all categories, beyond all attributes, like when people talk about the dharma kaya or people talk in the via negativity about the nature of the ultimate Godhead, beyond anything that can be said about it. And take that beautiful idea and that light permeating our consciousness and it's one of the elements of the imaginal that then opens up the whole sense and within that whole sense there will be a soul-making sense of values and they will have dimensionality and divinity and beauty and beauty and necessity and all of that. So it's possible he meant eternal punishment and reward but we can modify that and then this beautiful idea, for me beautiful idea and beautiful language that he's using can be modified from the perspective and the understanding of soul-making dharma. But what it will lead to is a slightly different conclusion I think than what Augustine is implying because it won't then imply necessarily always the same conclusions about, we said this before, an activity or a thing in itself. But rather this activity or that thing will be sensed with soul and then implicit in that is the sense of divinity and dimensionality and duty and the self's autonomy, duty and my autonomy, beauty, creation, discovery, fullness of intention, all that will be there. So not the thing in itself but a different sense of this thing compared to that thing, this choice compared to that choice. And can we trust that? The fullness of intention and all the other soul-making dharma elements. So there's a soul-making dharma modification perhaps of what he said, probably I would guess but I don't know in terms of what he said about eternity, the eternal, contemplating eternal. But there's also probably a modification as we've said before in terms of what it, where it delivers us to in relation to, it won't be a universal this thing or that thing, this activity or that activity is taboo, prescribed or prescribed. But what we're delivered to is a soul-making sense of something and of something over something else. And that can guide us, can we trust that to guide us? And also I don't know if I mentioned this the other day, I think I mentioned it very briefly, is there any place for antinomies in Augustine's view of ethics? We talked a lot about them in Sita and soul, but it may well be the case that through a soul-making dharma practice, soul-making practice in relation to ethical choices, that antinomies are there, are felt, but they're resolved, they're solved for us through bringing the soul-making practice to bear. Because okay, I appreciate that these are antinomies, there's two moral pulls in different directions, but I feel for me guided to choose this one. And I can trust that it's ethical, but I also know, I'm mature enough to know that yes, and that means I'm neglecting this other one. There's an antinomy there as Hartland says, and I have said so much in the scene of Soul Talks, we cannot get away from antinomies. So I don't know if Augustine doesn't see that or tries to avoid the whole issue, but soul-making dharma practice as well helps us navigate those antinomies and accept the inevitable guilt, if we're going to call it guilt, the fact that in navigating an antinomy, in making a choice in life, and I have to make a choice, I have to make choices in life, sitting on a fence forever and it's not, Hartman calls that, that's really a sin. But I accept the inevitable guilt. One example I've given several times I think is, you know, I wrote this letter to Dharma teachers ten years ago, I think it was, about climate change and about flying so much in the dharma, and I was fully aware, there was a very strident tone, a very critical, very aggressive, perhaps even sounded arrogant, I was very aware of that, and I was aware that it was going to piss people off and hurt people, people would feel hurt rather. But I sent it anyway, and yes, and quite a lot of people apparently were not happy at all, but I still to this day do not regret sending it. It was a soul choice. And I was tuning in to the, there was an antinomy there, to write it that way, to write it another way, to write, to send it, to not send it. So it was soul that was guiding me really. Even at that time my understanding of all that was much, much, much less clear to me, much less articulated, much less explored, but it was really soul that was guiding me. And I fully accept that I was in a way neglecting, let's say other moral values and virtues, through the tone of the letter and all that. Somehow it seemed necessary to write it in that way, in that tone. So I accept the guilt of neglecting those other values in the way that I wrote it. But if all this sounds, you know, because it may be for some people again who are not that experienced in actual soul-making dharma practice. Now I know there are some people who have listened to loads of, loads of talks and maybe all the talks on soul-making dharma, but actually haven't practiced much at all, or not in any way that it's really taken off and really made a big impact on their being in the practice, maybe touched by the talks or for whatever reason they're listening, maybe heard other people talk about it. But if you're in that camp, you know, and this makes you, I think if you've done a lot of practice, this idea of approaching, of soul-making practice, this idea of approaching ethics with soul-making sensibility and conceptual framework and practices, it won't alarm you. And maybe some people just say, oh I'm really not sure, I'm really not sure, how do I know I can trust that? The practice hasn't matured enough to give you that trust in the whole paradigm yet. And maybe then an experiment, if you're really interested in the question, can I trust this, is this a way forward? If you're really interested in the question, just take the trouble to do a little experiment, which might be, here's an ethical choice and practice sensing with soul with regard to that ethical choice. As I said, whenever I introduce it either, we said very briefly, either through an image, an imaginal figure that comes up, or through the values and virtues involved as ideal images. Practice sensing the soul that way in regard to that ethical choice without carrying out the action that that practice implies or suggests, without carrying out that choice, unless the same conclusion as what the soul-making practice suggests is provided via whatever your usual mode of approaching and judging ethical choices is. So you're not actually doing anything different, you're not doing or choosing anything different than you would usually do or choose. But you're adding this practice and do that many times with many different situations and many different kind of choices and see what happens. Now if you don't really care, you're not going to bother to do that. But if you do care, if you're actually really interested in this question, can I really trust this with regard to ethics, shouldn't we have another basis in ethics? Surely we can't put soul-making as basis for ethics. There must be ethics as a basis then soul-making, surely. Especially when I hear you talking about all those weird images you have, Rob of devouring and devouring beloveds and blood everywhere and ritual slaughter and all that, surely we must put ethics first and then the soul-making. So if you're really interested in that question, actually do some experimentation on your own, as I've suggested. Do that many times in many different ethical situations and see. And see if what happens is you don't learn to trust that actually the soul-making could be a basis for ethics. See, you'll know for yourself and you won't have done anything differently in the course of the experiment. You're not being asked to do anything different than you would have done anyway or chosen anyway. Anyway, so one of the modifications, very central modification that the soul-making dharma paradigm brings, as we said in regard to the Augustine example and others, and also Augustine's example of the cosmic order, was that, excuse me, it's no longer the thing or the action in itself, universally, that is decreed right or wrong. Valuable, not valuable, ethical or not. It's the question of whether it's in-souled and in-soul-able. So this is really important. And yesterday we talked about the whole notion or the whole, the whole fact of this kind of post-prostinent reformation, this affirmation or elevation of ordinary life, work and production and family and children, and historically that equalization, let's say, of ordinary life, where it was prior to that perhaps seen as less valuable than a life obviously devoted to, consecrated to God. And then there was historically post-reformation with the reformation, this equalization of ordinary life, this affirmation, elevation of it. And originally, historically, originally, one, we were seen as taking part in God's plan. So it mattered how we approached that, that we saw our ordinary life and our work and our family as really taking part in God's plan. And that plan, well then she was connected with this more horizontal cosmic order, but anyway, we were taking part in God's plan. And over time, it became just ordinary life without any reference to God. Ordinary life was seen as valuable, as worthwhile, as in itself, not just okay, but important, as qualifying as the good life, or etc. But the reference to God had gone. It was a historical sort of evolution, devolution, development. Now, with soul-making dharma approach, what we're saying is it's not that it is or isn't that ordinary life is worthwhile or good, with a capital G or beautiful in itself, but it's how we sense it and how we sense the things of ordinary life, family, work, children. Are we sensing them with soul? Because when we are, then they're rooted in a sense, in our sense, our palpable sense of divinity, Buddha nature, whatever you want to call it. But the ontology there is not simply objective and not simply subjective. So it's not in the thing itself as a universal, the value resides universally in this thing for everyone. And that's just true. It's in the sense of the sensing results, in the soul-making sense. Now it gives us the sense of divinity, but that sense of divinity is also neither simply objective nor simply subjective. Different ontology. So in a way we're not really making a statement about ordinary life or family life and its value. What matters is the relationship. What matters is, is it sensed with soul? And that's in a way what it means, what makes it worthwhile, what makes it qualify as living a really worthwhile life. The soul is more than the heart. It's what makes it beautiful in that way. So we're not saying for or against ordinary life or family life or anything like that. That's important. What's important is, is it sensed with soul? And that's the guide for how to live, what to live, what's worthwhile, which is this bigger question of ethics. So we just said neither simply objective nor simply subjective. That's the ontology that's wrapped up in all this, underpinning all this. Could leave things there, but could go a little, much further, just extend into a slightly different connection here. And with the risk and probability of actually leaving things a little inconclusive, but still think it's worth exploring a little bit. Because we've been considering ethical values, but we can also consider aesthetic values or beauty itself as a value too. And I want to do so now. I've spoken about it before and I've written about it recently, which will be out, well, not for a while, but sometime. And emphasized in both talking about it and writing about it, how important and instructive it is to actually inquire into beauty and our notions of beauty and our sense of beauty, how important and instructive that is with regard to soul making Dharma and practice. Intimate the connection is there. So beauty is a value too. What's the ontology of beauty? And again, William States and others would can jump right in and say, well, the fact that we don't, you can't prove that this or that thing is beautiful. The fact that people don't agree doesn't mean, does not imply that there doesn't exist an objective independent truth to beauty. Some people also nowadays would like to say values, ethical values are illusions actually. Different ways of saying that or different explanations for why they think that. And they might say there's no such thing as beauty really, what there is a sense of pleasure. And again, Harman and others would say, well, beauty exists for human beings, just like values exist for human beings. And in Charles Taylor's words, you know, just as a best account of material reality includes things like quarks, our current best account includes things like quarks. In order to talk about and to explain the sort of how material, how material reality is and what it is, our best account includes things like quarks, our best account of our humanity and our human concerns must include things like values and beauty. Because without them, without those notions and without those kind of that kind of vocabulary, it's not just hard, but actually impossible to choose and to navigate in life. We touched on this before, I can't, I might have an idea of it's all just atoms or whatever. Or even I'm choosing this because it's pleasant or unpleasant, but it's not, it's not really what's, it's not really the best account of what's moving me in this or that situation or how I choose. So there's different ontologies with regard to beauty, whether it has independent existence or whether it's completely an illusion or, you know, whether it's neither wholly created by my way of looking nor fully objectively independently there. It's not just in the eyes of the holder, but nor is it completely in the object alone. Create discovered, again, this kind of alternate ontology, alternative ontology. Remember, quarks are participatory too. So the whole thing gets a little more, that's interesting. One, not sure what the degree of prevalence, but certainly a lot of quantum people who really think hard about quantum physics. There's a lot of quantum, a lot of physicists don't think hard about quantum physics, but for the people that do, you know, there's some portion that takes seriously the notion that quarks and everything else, that's so-called material is participatory. So it doesn't exist independent of the observer and how it is and what it is and where it is and all that depends on the observer. So it's an alternative ontology, but it may, this neither subjective nor objective fully simply, but it may not just apply to things like values and beauty, it may also apply to material things, as we've talked about. And whatever the ontological status of beauty and of values, you know, these things are deeply important to the soul and somehow they're communicated soul to soul. Beauty can be communicated soul to soul and shared between souls. And a sense of value and the beauty of value as well. How wonderful, how amazing this possibility of communication, how wonderful, how amazing the depth to which we can care about these things, to which we feel they're important. So it might be that there's a kind of ontological middle way with regard to beauty that's actually pretty similar to the imaginary middle way. And that's similar to a possible, one of the possible ontologies, same kind of ontological middle way regarding values. That would be different or in some ways of construing, that would be different than Hartman's idea of a firmament of values objectively existing. But actually it could still be made congruent. It could still be made congruent. Depends on our notion of what the mind is. But it's interesting too, if we just reflect a little bit on our culture, where our culture is at regarding ontologies of say three different domains, mathematics, ethics and aesthetics. So with regard to mathematics, I think most people in our Western culture would agree that there are independently existing mathematical truths. And also that there is a difference in human beings, a kind of innate talent to understand those truths and to realise those truths, those mathematical truths. And also that some people are obviously much more trained than others are. And that we trust those people who are trained more than we trust people who are not trained with regard to what's true in mathematics. These mathematical truths are just widely regarded as independently true, whether you're a mathematician or not. With regard to ethics, it's quite a bit more complicated. If we think about this question of ethos, of what's a really worthwhile life, what's a really beautiful life, then it seems as I said, kind of almost fundamentally given in our Western culture to say there's no independent truth about that. No one can tell you what's a worthwhile life, what's a beautiful life. So there's quite a strong view that ethos in that sense, that's not really the right word, but ethics in that larger sense about what is a worthwhile life, what is really good, what is a good, there's no independent truth to that. When we shrink the domain of ethics down to the question of right and wrong, then people often, or what's very common, is for people to say there is an independent truth. There is a truth here about what's right and wrong. The very fact that there's so much argument about what's right and wrong for so many questions and issues should make us wonder whether our aggressive belief that there is a right or wrong is actually tenable. And with regard to talent etc, I think most people would probably believe that some psychopaths or other people who have a mental illness are not capable or less capable, a lot less talented in recognising right and wrong. And in regard to the area of ethics that has to do with what's worthwhile, what's a worthwhile life, what's a beautiful life, the idea of someone being more talented in that domain or being better trained in that domain, it's not universally accepted at all, it's probably universally dismissed. The maths, ethics, aesthetics, then it gets also really, hmm, that's interesting. It seems to me, I don't know, I was just trying to think this through, it seems to me, with classical art, let's say figurative, classical figurative art, literature, music, classical music, classical literature, classical architecture. People are often willing to admit this, there's an independent truth there but I'm not capable of judging it because I'll leave that to the experts. So we agree that there's a training possible there, there's maybe talent possible in ascertaining these things and there must be an independent truth, interestingly. An expert knows that independent truth. When it comes to more contemporary kind of art, then it gets really, really more complicated and more, I don't know, messy in a way. And here's an interesting thing I think, if one cares really deeply about art, and by art I mean all the arts, or any, I'm including, well I'm including all the arts, but if one cares deeply about art, then one's relationship to art is actually related to what one wants art to do and to affect. So what do I, if I really care about art, I'm looking to art for something. I want it to have certain effects, I want it to do something in my soul, or maybe even in the world, if I really care about it. And that, that question of what I want it to do, what I want art to do in my being, or hopefully in other beings, that question is related to ethics in the sense of what I consider good, what I consider is a life worth living, is connected to my sense of dimensionality and maybe even divinity. So if I care deeply about art, I care deeply about what I want art to do, I have a certain, certain things that I want art to do to affect. And that's related to my ethics in the larger sense of my sense of what's good, what makes a life worth living, my sense of dimensionality and all that in existence, maybe my sense of divinity, even if I don't use that word, sacredness. And maybe then, if all that's there, I tend to harbour a view that tends towards a sense of the interdependent existence of truths regarding both ethics and aesthetics. If I care deeply about art, care deeply about what art does and what it affects in my being and hopefully in other beings. And that's related to my sense of what's good, what's worthwhile, what's deep, what's really meaningful, what's really important in life. And then it's often the case then that I harbour, even if I conceal it a little bit from others, a view that tends towards more the notion of the independent existence of truths about both what is ethical in the sense of meaningful and what constitutes a life worth living. And also what's of value aesthetically. So, personally, I've said this before, I cannot agree that the collected works of John Coltrane are equal in value to the collected works of the Smurfs or even the collected works of Britney Spears or whatever. I just can't agree really if I'm honest. I can't agree. To me, there's a whole different order of value, aesthetic value, which touches on spiritual value, which touches on ethics. And what I want John Coltrane, when I hear his music, when I'm open to his music, what it does to me, what it can do to me is totally related to my sense of existence, my sense of soul, is totally related to my sense of what makes life worth living and my sense of God and my sense of dimensionality. The ethics and the aesthetics are connected here if I care deeply about art. And I tend towards a kind of more realist view of independent existence of value there. I really cannot agree if you're going to say, yeah, the Smurfs are just as valuable as John Coltrane. But it's complex because there's also a kind of, it seems, I don't know, I'm not really sure about all this, there seems to be also a kind of taboo more widely about asserting an independent truth regarding the aesthetic worth for something that's non-classical. I mean, you get sometimes immature, that's shit, that's shit. Usually it's just because someone's unfamiliar with some form or some kind of new contemporary music or contemporary art, but usually the person that says that art is not that important to them. It's just shit. It's not coming from a place where art is actually really important to them. It's something that they spend a lot of time opening themselves to and resonating with and feeling. It's just that something's unfamiliar. So they just say it's shit. They're not trained in a way. So I don't know, maths is that, sorry, maths, ethics in both senses, in the wider sense that we've been trying to open up here, what makes life worthwhile? What makes life really meaningful? What's a life worth living? What is the beautiful life? What is really good that I should aspire to? And in the smaller sense of right and wrong and aesthetics, the value in art, and just a part of aesthetics, question of value in art and whether that has independent objective existence. There's a kind of, I don't know, it's confusing when you look at the culture and where we are in the culture with these things. Why am I bringing this up? Partly just because of the interesting connection in ontology between, we talked about maths in the realm of ideas and ideation of the national values. We've talked about ethics, ontology, and then corresponding ontologies of beauty. But also, I'm also bringing up, so to me that's just interesting, but I'm also bringing up the cultural question of where we are, where we tend to be our society, the kind of views that are prevalent around all that. Because soul making dharma is born now at this time in our culture. And so it's born into a set of, or a soup really of ontological and epistemological views and beliefs and questions and possibilities, but also unquestioned assumptions and rigidities and all kinds of things. So it's quite interesting and relevant to also reflect or to kind of get a sense of where the culture is on these questions of ontology and epistemology with regard to different domains. Maths, ethical domains in two senses, and aesthetics. Because it may be that someone listening to all this, or someone listened to even previous talks before the ethics, thinks, well, all this soul making dharma business and soul making practice, it's a bit elitist, isn't it? I mean, you have to have done all this other practice and understand this, and you're talking about all this sophisticated philosophy and psychology and dharma understanding, and isn't that all a bit elitist? And there's a certain kind of reaction in relationship to that can be from, you know, born in our culture. And then we'll say, well, if you're trying to propose a soul making dharma approach to ethics, then that's really elitist. You're expecting too much from people. Only a very elite few would be able to do that. So what's interesting, you think, okay, well, if that's the case, why is it not like mathematics, where you would give the ethical questions to experts, elite, those who are trained, or train yourself? And epistemologically speaking, giving something to an expert or relying on an expert opinion, as I pointed out, I don't know, sometime or other in the talk, that's a kind of epistemology as well. We do that all the time with science. We do that with medicine. You know, if the doctor tells me, yeah, your cancer has come back, how do you know? Well, this and this and this, the blood tests and the, or whatever. This is the probable prognosis. I'm relying on the expert opinion. And we do that all the time in lots of fields, primarily medicine and science, but as I said, also classical art and classical literature, you just sell so and so says, this is good. So yeah, probably is good. But what about doing that with ethics? We think it's, it's not that simple. We acknowledge, as I said, for maths and for aesthetics, that there are experts and they've probably had a long and difficult training that's necessary to reach that level of expertise. And maybe they had some innate talent or dispositional propensity to that area. And we give those questions and those issues to them. Well, one of the reasons we don't do that with ethics as well is because it affects, it is going to affect my life and my choices much more directly, it seems, than questions of aesthetics or mathematics. I can't avoid it like I can avoid mathematics and I can even avoid art to a certain extent. I mean, soul making is not, soul making practice is not something anyone else can really do for you anyway, it's your personal practice. But maybe, you know, politically speaking, socially speaking, in issues and matters that affect everyone. So for example, you know, Heathrow expansion or the talking about this HS2 rail line, high speed rail line linking the south and the north of England, supposedly to, you know, more equalize the relative wealth and economic growth in the north and south, where it hasn't been equal so far. But while we're in the process of even beginning to build this HS2 railway line, high speed railway line, it's decimating, but, you know, ecological reserves and nature reserves, etc. Some with endangered species, all kinds of things, felling lots of trees, etc. Or as Heathrow has mentioned, these kinds of issues that affect, will affect a lot of people, maybe even everyone. Is democracy the best way of deciding? I touched on this, I think, in the senior assault talk. Maybe, maybe not anymore. I don't know. You know, world of equal democracy, but there's Facebook and Google and who knows who tracking my preferences and opinions online and then feeding me both information and marketing according to my, in line with my history and my propensities and not opening me up to other views. On top of which there's the spreading of fake news, there's Russian cyber influence and who knows else, there's the whole unrestrained global capitalist market, global market capitalism and advertising, in a way promoting sometimes the lowest common denominator of desires. And even like deciding what's on TV, you know, how much or whatever, how much does that come from a kind of democratic process and is it necessary to be trusted? For lots of reasons, partly because, you know, in ethical terms, because we've, as I said, through this talk, five parts or whatever is now, that we've kind of lost the ground for ethical thinking and ethical discernment. And certainly we've lost the ground, lost even the question and the space in the larger sense of ethics, I mean, about really what's a worthwhile life, what's good, what's beautiful, what is a beautiful life. We've just lost that. And so to hand it to the people and to a supposedly equal democratic process, is that really the best thing anymore? I don't know. It's obviously a really tricky question. I mean, if everyone were trained in sensing the soul and educated in virtue ethics, you know, approaching the soul that way, then democracy and these decisions, as much as these decisions that do, or rather that the question of what is worthwhile, what is beautiful, what is really important, what makes a life worth living, they do bear on these, these kind of political, social, economic questions. So if everyone was trained in opening up that sense and trained in discerning, then democracy would be a very different thing. You know, Plato's Republic is one of his major texts. He taught, he taught us in his ideal society, he has a kind of spiritual elite, sort of they're specially trained and dedicated and they do make decisions. This is really, you know, dangerous territory for Western culture, Western society, a dangerous idea, a difficult idea, a repugnant idea for most people to entertain, the idea of a spiritual elite again. But, you know, is democracy really in such a healthy place anymore? Again, for lots of different reasons. I'm not sure what the answers are, but yes, in Plato's Republic, which actually just reads as a kind of fantasy novel, sort of a utopian opposite of sort of George Orwell, there's a spiritual elite that maybe educate and dictate a hierarchy of moral purposes. But again, what would it be if that was that hierarchy was related to sensing with soul and not to this thing or that thing, the activity in itself? Tricky. I mean, just to say as well, it's not as if we don't have elites running our democracies, you know, the ultra rich. 13 men are as wealthy as something like 50% of women in the third world, or I can't remember, but anyway, ultra rich and corporations deciding laws and policies as if that's in a democracy and it already goes on. Or, you know, political leaders, Trump and Putin and even Boris Johnson, who are very willing and actually able to override or disregard or even override democratic processes. So yes, we have this ideal of democracy, but it's also like, it's sagging at best, and it's got some holes in it. So I don't know what the answers to all this are at all. And yeah, it's a kind of the idea of a spiritual elite is, you know, but alarming to me also. But who do you want in power? It's not as if there isn't elites running things at the moment. So I don't know. These are just questions. As I said, opening up territory, which is more inconclusive and conclusive, but it would be wonderful if we were all taught, trained to develop practice, if not soul making, or some other practice that helped us discern and navigate and relate to and really be alive to and sensitive to the questions within this much larger notion of ethics. What is the beautiful life? What makes a life beautiful? What is really worthwhile? In what can I anchor my ethics? What other sense of another dimension can I ground my ethics in? My sense of what's not just right or wrong, but my sense also of what's worthwhile and beautiful. It would be wonderful if we were all trained to develop practice as a practice is like that. So making down practice or something akin to that, that helps us in that territory, in that domain, helps the soul, helps the mind and the heart to be sensitive, to navigate, to have a compass. Just as we are, most of us, the ideal in Western society is that everyone is trained to some degree in mathematics, in reading and writing, to some degree in logic, now even computer skills, part of the normal education at school, and teaching mindfulness meditation at schools. So part of me thinks, oh it's just a complete pipe dream that society would ever get to a place where these kinds of practices and these kinds of tools and approaches and this kind of way of thinking, it's not to have to be exactly soul making now, but something akin that really allows our beings to bring our sensitivity and our discernment and our deep soul and our deep intelligence to bear on this domain, on this domain, on these questions. Partly I think that's a complete pipe dream and yet we have these other trainings that it really took a while to kind of solve, establish as norms. I don't know if the mindfulness in schools is yet a norm but it may well be soon, I don't know. So who knows, maybe it's not such a pipe dream and maybe anyway we don't have to wait for the whole culture to adopt something, to be established in the whole culture. We can start ourselves and obviously for ourselves we can find out for ourselves what does this do to my image of ethics? What does it do then to my sense of existence and my sense of navigating choices in life, responding to ethical situations, responding to social, political, economic issues, environmental issues? What does it do to my whole sense of myself and my life and the possibilities of my life?

 Let's continue our exploration, inquiry, explanation and unpacking of some of what soul-making Dharma and sensing the soul, perhaps sensing the soul might bring to the whole domain of ethics and how we think about ethics, how we relate to ethics and our ethical choices, our ethical life, how soul-making Dharma can really include ethics and how it might support our notion of ethics, our idea of ethical life, perhaps in ways that it needs supporting these days. And indeed that's where we kind of started with this idea that perhaps there are some needs that we can identify and we list as seven or eight needs that any sort of approach to ethics, system of ethics might have to incorporate somehow these days. At least that's how I would think of it. And so we've gone through a few and they're all completely interrelated and imply each other, involved in each other. Today I'd like to explore a little bit the need related to the sense and the idea of what a human is, what a human being is and what a human being can be. So how we think about ethics and how we approach ethics must somehow impinge and affect hopefully in a helpful way the sense and the notion of what a human being is and what a human being can be. That that whole idea and sense of our humanity is very much and should be very much tied in with our sense of ethics so that the two, our sense of ethics and our sense of our humanity should imply each other, should feed each other, should support each other, should be congruent with each other. So just to make sure that all this doesn't just sound like a sort of very woefully exercising sort of abstract philosophy or worse history of Western society or Western philosophy, I wonder if we can really get a sense, help to get a sense of really grounding what we're talking about and what we're attempting to talk about today in a real lived sense, in a real experiential feel for, oh yes, this is what we're talking about and this matters. So perhaps most people, hopefully, hopefully most people who should be listening to this talk have had enough experience with soul making dharma practice that they've, for instance, just had even just a couple of images perhaps that have really touched them deeply. The whole experience of the way the imaginal opened up and how pertinent it was to their particulars of their life and their situation and the sense of beyonds there and the sense of the other elements and duty and beauty and eros and loving and being loved and eternality and reverence and grace and all of that. Most people listening, hopefully, will have had at least one or two experiences where the soul has been really impacted and in that, as we say, because when an imaginal image is allowed to do its thing, the soul making dynamic is not interrupted, not blocked, there's the image and as an erotic imaginal object, so to speak, and then the self will also become imaginal. So hopefully most people listening will have had that kind of experience, maybe even once or twice, where the whole imaginal constellation has begun to subsume the sense of self. Self becomes sensed with soul, imaginal, so to speak. And so if you can remember back to those experiences and the sort of profundity of them and the sense of, oh wow, wow, wow, this is really another order of sense of things that I'm used to, a different order of a sense of self than I'm used to, different even than emptiness or dissolving in jhana or metta or whatever it is. So if you can just get a sense of that, is that possible to remember that? You don't have to invoke it completely, but just remember a little bit about it right now. And then if we can perhaps delineate a spectrum at the other end of this, one end of the spectrum, you have such an experience of your humanity. So not just a sense of yourself, what I want to point to is your sense of your humanity, that in that, when the self was brought in and involved in the soul making dynamic and the self became imaginal and the self was sensed with soul. Yes, there's a different sense of self, but with that too there's a different sense of your humanity, your depths, who you are, your relationship with divinity or Buddha nature and the cosmos and all of that. So you can just remember the sense of your humanity there, the sense and the logos also of your humanity there as part of the sense of self that was there when you were sensing yourself with soul. So maybe that's on a spectrum, at one end of a spectrum and at the other end is just the normal perhaps sense of self, sense of humanity, that's more accurate, it's a normal sense of humanity that we, most people walk around with and move around with today in our culture of Western secular modernity. Just the normal sense of what the human being is, the normal feel of that, the normal idea of that. Of course we could go further and when someone's full of self-hatred etc., but just stay with that sort of norm, that norm of Western modernity. So that norm of Western modernity, that sense of your humanity or humanity at one end and at the other end this sort of sense of humanity when the self is sensed with soul, part of an imaginal constellation, self, other world. Maybe in the middle, for some there's a sort of grey area, or not so much grey area but a continuum let's say, where depending on what circles you move in etc. there may be a sort of prevalence of kind of, I don't know what you call them, new age ideas etc. about angels and being shamans or witches and that sort of identification and maybe even practices and rituals etc. So maybe the sense of your humanity that you might have had if you take seriously the bodhisattva vow or if you're in a ceremony of taking the bodhisattva vows and feeling the self as bodhisattva with that aspiration, perhaps that affected the sense of your humanity in some way perhaps. Or the idea of having Buddha nature or being Buddha nature, there are many possibilities. And at the risk of being contentious, let's put that in the middle. More what I'm pointing to is more just when there's a sort of idea of something and maybe a kind of practice but it hasn't really turned the soil and ignited in the way that you know that soul making practice can. So there's a kind of something, there's a kind of different ideation that's supported by the people around you, maybe there's ceremonies and rituals and certain language etc. maybe certain practices, maybe a change in experience but it's not quite of the order of what we're talking about when soul making practice really ignites and the imaginal really gets going, the authentic imaginal. So we have this spectrum, the norms of secular modernity, this sort of middle ground where certain ideas are sort of doing something in the psyche, maybe certain practices, certain rituals, certain ceremonies, certain communities and languages. And then the soul making sense of one's humanity. And so just, can you just linger with that spectrum, either the two ends or the whole spectrum and just compare, compare the senses of humanity, the ideas but also the very sense of one's humanity. So this is what I'm talking about, it's not abstract, we're really talking about something that's not just in the realm of ideas or philosophy or history, so it's really, it's got to do with that and that degree of import and impact to the human being, to you, to me. No wonder as we go through the talk tonight if you can hold that remembered sense or those remembered senses, the remembered sense of the normal human sense of your humanity or the contemporarily normal sense of that and also alternating with your remembered sense of your humanity when you were profoundly touched by an imaginal practice or soul making sense or sensing the soul. Just lightly in the back of your mind, the back of the chitta as a kind of reference or references throughout this talk, throughout the listening, just to really make sure as I said that it's anchored in a sense of the import and realisation, a palpable realisation of the import of what we're talking about, that we're not talking abstractly here. So just as much as possible, very lightly in the background, I wonder if that might help digest and assimilate and empower really the listening. Okay? This is the wish list item I want to look at today. A sense and the idea of what it is to be human and what a human being can be. And last time we talked about dimensionality and we gave out these four ways that sort of dimensionalising of ethics or providing of something or other in another dimension to secure, to found, to root, to ground the ethical thinking and the ethical justifications in the four ways, principle ways in which that was sort of given in history. And we looked at how soul making dharma kind of could modify them or what it would have to say about them, etc. And so one of them was, this was actually a non-dimensionalising, the utilitarian or commonly for some people back in the Buddhist notion, just decreasing suffering. That's the most important thing. That's the primary issue and the primary purpose. Decreasing suffering or increasing pleasure or happiness. And without really spending any time differentiating between the different kinds of suffering. Okay? So that was one of them. And when we talk about differentiating between different kinds of suffering, not talking about for instance, your child gets upset in the supermarket when they want, they see some candy sweets that they want and you say no and they start crying and they're suffering. And in your mind it's like, well, they're suffering now but I'm saving their teeth later and their metabolism and possibly their brain from deteriorating into ADHD, etc. So we're not talking about that kind of comparison of suffering. We're not talking about, as I think it was Ajahn Chah said, we're not talking about the suffering now, comparing a suffering now that just ripens in more suffering compared to a suffering now that brings about or enables less suffering in the future. We're not talking about that kind of comparison. We're talking about more things like, as I said, I gave examples the other day. I've given examples in the past of kind of like, you know, why chemo was so difficult to me going into a certain chemo ward in a certain hospital felt very, very difficult and I pinpointed it, you know, it was a soul suffering more than a body suffering, body sufferings, there were plenty of body sufferings wrapped up with chemo. There's something, something caused a suffering in my soul that was really, really difficult to deal with, the hardest thing to deal with for me. So and then I was trying to explain we had set up this ritual with Catherine when I was going back to chemo and just trying to find the right soul orientation to it and have this little crucible and was cutting fingernails and bits of hair and pricking myself, bits of blood, etc., bodily elements in there, giving them up and the question of whether giving is a part of soulful ritual, necessary part of soulful ritual. But there was something which I actually can't remember. I was thinking, what about my eyes and my ears and the mind and what that has to encounter in there, that that feels like a wounding to the soul. So there was something in the ritual which I just can't remember now that captured the soul suffering and the suffering for the mind, for tomorrow's mind that would go into the chemo tomorrow, for giving up of this giving of elements of my body today. There was something for the mind. I can't remember anyway, what we're really talking about different kinds of suffering, like how there's a way of approaching ethics that just ignores any difference between different kinds of suffering. Soul suffering, for example, versus bodily suffering, sufferings of meaninglessness versus physical pain, etc. We talked about that. What I want to say now is that refusing to make a differentiation between different kinds of suffering, refusing any hierarchy of sufferings, that they're actually sufferings of a different level in the being, and that refusal in utilitarian ethics or ethics in some kind of, for some people, their Buddhist-based ethics, just about reducing suffering, utilitarian, just about increasing pleasure and happiness and reducing unpleasant, reducing suffering, reducing pain. What I want to say is that refusal of differentiating hierarchies in suffering is that it corresponds with a flattening of the human being, a refusal to acknowledge and to conceive and to sense that the human being has also dimensions. And these different kinds of suffering are, if you like, wounds at different levels of, or different dimensions of the human being. If we talk about that other potential dimensionalizing, which is an attempt to dimensionalize in what was called voluntarism, just that God said so, usually that's conceived with, the human being is quite flatly conceived. And it goes very much with a post-Reformation theology, without intermediaries. And the human is just flatly conceived. The dimensionality comes in the radical duality and in the huge distance between the human being and God. But the human being themselves, or humanity themselves, is actually quite flatly conceived, usually in that voluntarism philosophy, basis for ethics. If we take the attempt to provide dimension for ethics in the cosmic order, then the vertical cosmic order, the hierarchical cosmic order, usually always goes with a sense of the dimensionality of a human being, a human being in themselves, or is themselves a kind of, a being that is characterized by having different dimensions, different levels of our being, different levels of our soul. Whereas the horizontal cosmic order, which came to prevail and predominate historically much more over a notion of a vertical cosmic order, that horizontal cosmic order, again, unsurprisingly brought with it, concomitant with that, was a notion of the human being, a flat notion of the human being, much more in common with our, well, with a lot of aspects of our contemporary notion of human being, not completely, because there are other complications historically. For instance, our interiority, these are things that came later and came with, well, they also have a long history. But generally speaking, we can say there's a flattening, in the sense that I want to talk about, of the human being. And if we try and offer rationality as a possible dimension, other dimension in which to ground, to which to have recourse for our ethics and our ethical thinking, then it depends on the metaphysics that goes with the whole idea of rationality. So for Kant, for Hegel, certainly for Plato, rationality implied the implied dimensionality of the human. For Plato and Hegel, it's an implied kind of dimensionality, the cosmos kind of, in very different ways between Plato and Hegel. But they're implied in that idea of rationality. Again, it corresponds, there's a correspondence of the human being to the cosmic order, and to open to the cosmic order is, and then to set one's life up, erotically really, in correspondence with that order. That's rational, that's rational human behaviour and rational human thinking in the larger sense of the word. For Plato. And for Kant, the rationality had a kind of luminosity to it, because it was part of our essential nature, part of what God had given us, part of what it means to be made in the image of God, etc. But with our current dominant use of what we mean by rationality, just what's called procedural rationality. Again, at first it might have been, oh, this is God given, this capacity is God given, but now, over time, through history, and with increasing secularization, I'm not sure how different people view rationality and how capable it is of providing that other dimension that ethics needs. And it almost never really does, no one would ever really claim that, for example. So this is where a human being's dignity lies in their rationality, because then someone who's brain damaged or got some impaired mental functioning in terms of their logical rational capabilities, if a person was strict with the view that rationality provided that dimension, then we would treat them with much less respect, etc., which is generally not what we do in certainly Western courts in terms of human rights and that kind of thing. But the question here, again, that I want to focus on today is, what do all these different ideas and attempts and attempts at dimensionality, how do they influence our sense of what a human being is, what a human being can be? Let me look too briefly at the history of the Protestant Reformation and their rejection of any intermediaries between humanity and God, and that meant a rejection of angels as well, of course, angels as intermediaries. Which means no language, no images, no daemons to refract the divine attributes. If you think of a kind of pure, bright, intense white light and it reaches a prism and then it refracts into different colors, all coming out at different angles, different wavelengths, different frequencies coming out at different angles. Maybe that's one way of understanding. Ah, this is this pure, white, undifferentiated light of God. It has all these different attributes, all these different colors and wavelengths in it, but the prism refracts them differently, the angelic world refracts them differently so we can separate them out so we can digest them more, see their beauty more. So the white light is definitely beautiful, but then this rainbow of other colors, we see more the beauty of the divine, the Buddha nature, and we see it in a bigger way, we spread it out through the prism. Perhaps that's a way of thinking of what the world of the angels does, what images do. But in the Protestant Reformation there was refusal of intermediaries, therefore refusal of angels, therefore refusal of a dimension that refracted the divine attributes, and a refusal then of seeing ourselves also as in turn reflecting and refracting those divine attributes through a sort of ladder from the divine, from the Buddha nature into the world of devas and angels and into human being. So this rejection had a lot of influence in history regarding what the human is, a lot of impact on the notion, the sense of what a human being is, and on their relationship to God, and on their relationship to the cosmic order of the cosmos. So what is a human being? You know if we talk again tying it in with something like species extinction, and the crime of species extinction, so yes of course that's a crime against the individual animals, uncountable numbers, uncountable suffering of individual animals, and yes of course it's a crime against the species, if we can say can there be a crime against a species. We talked about poly, poly against etc, and the crime of the ecocide hopefully making it into international law. So yes, yes, and then is species extinction a crime against animals? Yes, is it a crime against a species? Yes, is it a crime against the cosmic order, even the planetary order, the order of life on earth? Yes. But is it not, I feel it is also, or can it be regarded as a crime against humanity too? Species extinction is a crime against humanity too, not just because we are probably biologically dependent on many of these species and the way they work in the ecosystem. What I want to focus on more now, right now, is because of our potential soul connection with other species and with ecosystems. Ecosystem is such a cold scientific sounding word. Let's say with forests, for example, with coral reefs, with oceans. One way of understanding what a human being is, is that they are profoundly connected, our soul as a human being is profoundly connected with other species, other ecosystems. They are theophanies that we are called to witness, to open to, to sense with soul, to know their beauty, to know their depth, to know their divinity, and that that potential soul connection, because of course it's often really not realized that potential. We don't feel these things as a crime against humanity, or not enough people do, not enough human beings do. But maybe that very, that potential soul connection is that capability to sense with soul and feel species and ecosystems that way, is whatever you want to call it, deep or high, part of our humanity. It's an aspect of our soul, a dimension of our soul. Even like light pollution, the fact that it's so difficult to find a place in a northern hemisphere in the western world, where one can really see the stars well, and lie down on the earth at night, and open up to the magnificence of the heavens, the mystery, the sheer scale of it, the radiance, the depth of it. Is the fact that there are less and less shrinking amount of places where one can actually see that many stars? Is that also a crime against humanity? Or noise pollution, whereas there's so few places outside where, or a shrinking amount of places where the dominant sound is not mostly the sound of some kind or other of internal combustion engine basically burning fossil fuels, loudly. As opposed to the sound of birdsong, wind and trees, or whatever it is. Are these crimes against our humanity as well? What does it mean to be a human being? What is a human being? What can it mean to be a human being? What should it mean to be a human being? To me, these are really, really important questions. So we talked about the Protestant Reformation. I certainly don't want to kind of vilify the Protestant Reformation, because a lot of really good stuff came out of it, as much as a lot of difficulty in terms of wars and things, but also in terms of trying to trace historical threads that had their origins there. So Martin Luther instigating the Protestant Reformation in a way had a very, let's say, pessimistic and poor view of the human being. So poor that the human being was totally reliant on divine grace in Luther's view, in the Protestant view. Totally, there was very little a human being could do to work towards or ensure their own salvation. So it was a total reliance on the free will of God to save us. And with that, and we touched on this the other day, the sort of flip side of that, the corollary, what that really means is that there's very little place for the cultivation of ethical virtue. That loses its place as anything that's going to move you closer to God or open up the sense of the divine for you. So any kind of extra striving on behalf of monks or nuns or whatever it is, it's all pointless. And ethical virtue itself, the whole notion of the virtues kind of gets undermined. The whole notion of cultivating and aspiring to the virtues gets undermined in terms of salvation as does any notion of ritual or sacrament or any other extraordinary activity. There's very little place then again for the love of the Eros for that sort of extra reaching that souls are capable of. Super irrigation is going beyond. So at the time of the Renaissance, you had people like Nicholas Cusor and Marcelo Fucino and Giovanni Piccola Randa and they held a kind of, or they were promoting a kind of more exalted view of the human being and wrote a very beautiful text about that. And Luther kind of was really moving in the opposite direction and he emphasized the fall, meaning the fall Adam and Eve eating the apple, getting expelled from the garden, the fall. And that was central to his theology. Of course that fall and expulsion from Eden, that was always there in Christianity and Judaism, even when people espoused a more exalted and exalting view of the human being. There was still always some mention of the fall. But Martin Luther insisted that that was really placed that very centrally, the fall, and that human being, human nature was completely kind of corrupted by original sin. It was completely corrupted. Why? Again, the flip side of that is then the necessity of total dependence on redemption through God, through Christ. Salvation only comes through God. There's nothing in us that we can rely on, develop, work on, etc. So paraphrasing a historian called Jill Crane, he says, man, the humanity was therefore unable to make any contribution to one's own salvation. It's all up to God. So, in Protestant thought, the spiritual impotence and depravity of post-Lapsarian man, that means post-fall or post-expulsion from the Garden of Eden. And that just means this is how we are. Before the expulsion from the Garden of Eden, this is just something that's happened. You're born into that. You're born into original sin. Social impotence and depravity of post-Lapsarian man became a central doctrine. And then Calvin, who was very central in this movement of Protestantism, man's high opinion of himself, according to Calvin, had to be deflated, and he had to be convinced of his own corruption and debility, for only then would man realize he was lost and helpless without divine grace. And we mentioned the other day, Michelo Mortaa. And he too, though he was a Catholic and not a Protestant, similarly, he was also kind of set about to take humanity down a run, a good few runs, in one's sort of self-assessment. So Jill Craig writes, Mortaa was concerned to destroy man's presumption and lower his excessive estimate of his own worth. So one of the upshots of that for ethics was very, very significant, because Protestantism, the Reformation, has much brought much less place and much less regard for ethics and virtue in their cultivation, because it's all dependent on God. A little later, I don't know if I can read you something, Malakthon, a reformist thinker, again stressing the fall, stressing expulsion from the Garden of Eden. But he did something very interesting, because he almost separated out the realm of ethics from the realm of religion theology. This came as part of a movement of Protestant theology, was a separating out. First, there's no place for ethics, and then ethics comes back in, but it's separated from any connection with, real connection with divinity or divine aspiration or something like that. And this came from Malakthon. So ethics, I've been quoting again from Jill Craig, ethics has had nothing to do with the will of God or the remission of sins. It was exclusively concerned with rules governing external action and civil society. Conversely, theology had nothing to do with these ethical rules. You can see then this recourse to trying to dimensionalize ethics by placing it in relation to God in some way or another, in relationship to divinity in some way or another, gets totally shattered here as they get pulled apart. Ethics has nothing to do with God, nothing to do with religious aspiration, nothing to do with salvation even. Jill Craig again, by delineating these two different spheres of influence, Malakthon was in effect applying Luther's doctrine of the two kingdoms to ethics. So Luther had this idea, there's a kingdom of Christ and there's a secular kingdom and they coexist. They're not in different places or different times so much as they coexist. Yes, we live in civil society, but that's not the kingdom of Christ. The kingdom of Christ can be something that is constituted by some members of civil society, but it's among them and in their relationship to each other and to God. This is separating out of two kingdoms, Luther's thinking. Luther distinguished between the sacred kingdom in which true Christians are ruled by Christ, the Holy Spirit, and the secular kingdom in which non-Christians are ruled by political authorities through laws and coercion. Since the secular kingdom is also established by God and is necessary in order to preserve society, Christians must obey its authority. Provided it does not impinge on their higher loyalty to God by interfering in matters of faith. It's a celebration saying, yes, yes, you have to follow the laws and even the coercion of the ruler of your society, but that's only to preserve society because God said that's good too. It's got nothing to do with that whole realm of ethics. The whole realm of ethics has nothing to do with your relationship with God. Nothing to do with theology. So one of the things that Luther had really, really objected to, as much as he kind of objected against the Catholic Church, he also really objected to scholastic theology and the influence of Aristotle. And particularly Aristotle's ethics, he regarded as the worst enemy of grace. So you get this polarizing, so either you're, if you want to totally prioritize grace, divine grace and dependence on divine grace, then you totally dismiss any place for ethics. And if you give a central place for ethics and ethical aspiration and virtues, and perhaps that has even erode to growing into God, to theosis, to divinification, divinization, to all that, then you're shrinking the power of God and the place for God's grace. So Luther was very anti-Aristotle and Aristotle's influence in the Middle Ages and scholastic theology, Thomas Aquinas and all that. Because of this, because of how he saw it compromising and limiting our dependence on divine grace, whereas Meringthon came in and completely separated ethics and theology and then was able to sort of reclaim a place for even the ancient pagan philosophers, like Aristotle, etc., separate from one's relationship with God. So the ethics and that kind of ethical philosophy govern the external actions of those who had not yet been enlightened by the Holy Spirit, as Jill Gray says, and simply helped to preserve the peace and order of civil society. So this, I think, is extremely significant. The divorce of ethical from religious questions, which again means no dimensionality rooting the ethical sense, only rationality stepped in there in the procedural sense, in the flat sense. And in a way, the whole Western Enlightenment and secularism came partly at its roots in the very Protestant Reformation. It didn't start as secular at all. It started as an attempt at kind of increasing religiosity. But there were ideas there that when seed ideas, when they grew and their consequences were sort of extrapolated over time, had enormous consequences, both for religion in general and the religious sensibility and religious ideas, but also on society and on ethics. Interestingly, Malecthon hated Plato because more with Plato is the teaching that one can purify, as I said, this is kind of ladder, rational order to the universe, and one's sense of the virtues and one's sense of the values corresponds to that ladder, a bit like Augustine, and one can climb up this ladder by purifying the virtues and moving closer to God, closer to a vision of God. Malecthon thought that was literally the invention of the devil, as if you could live by that kind of rationality alone without Christianity and without divine grace, et cetera. But as I said, Malecthon's kind of sharp delineation, splitting between ethics and theology, they weren't just separated apart, allowed even Aristotelian moral philosophy to become reintegrated into the sort of standard Protestant education. Enormous consequences of all this played out, developed gradually over quite a while. So this emphasis in the Protestant Reformation, this emphasis on the fall, on the expulsion from Eden on original sin, and the rejection of mediation by priests, by any elite, rejection of the sacraments and the sacred, and all of that meaning that salvation is, as I said, completely and only dependent on divine grace. All this in terms of what it means for humanity, wrapped up in that is a total and radical duality of God and human, between God and human, which is completely and utterly different and that's that. There's no ladder in between, there's no dimensions of our being, there's no possible way of moving closer, there's no intermediaries, as I said, that refract and reflect and function as theophanies in the world. It's all dependent on divine grace. Again if we bring in soul making dharma here, so we have grace as an element of the imaginal, but in soul making dharma, in contrast to this Protestant teaching, everything's dependent on divine grace, that's all there is, you can't do anything. In soul making dharma, interestingly, if we reflect on this, we have this grace as an element of the imaginal, this sense of inexplicable gift, given this image or given this sense of things, and it was, I couldn't really engineer it, I'm not the master of it, it's inexplicable gift from the divine. That element is balanced by other elements, like we need to have an energy body awareness, develop an energy body awareness, this is something we can do, we need to, just the very idea that an image is a way of looking, implies that there are ways of looking, we can play with our ways of looking, it's dependent on us. So those two elements, or nodes of the lattice, also the autonomy, not just of the image, but of the self, that we have to assent, that we participate. In fact the node of create discover, that influences some creation, not just discovery. All of these balance the node of the element of grace, do you understand? Instead of the Protestant one, it's all grace, you get this much more balanced sort of fluid network. And if we entertain the idea of soul making, it gives us the sense that our Eros, our Eros, my Eros right now is divine, my psyche, my image, my capacity to have images, my soul, the logos, the thoughts I have, the insights, the conceptions. Either entertain that idea or actually those senses and ideas arising naturally through the soul making practice. It is divine, it's from the divine. And again, either entertaining the idea or it arising naturally from soul making practice that our egoic and neurotic shapes are kind of impoverished echoes, impoverished reflections of divinity, of angel, of image. These ideas and these senses very much provide a counterweight to a reliance on grace, on the guru, on whatever it is, on the divine completely. It's not totally up to me either. It's not just a matter of me becoming a master of soul making technique, the imaginal practice technique. But of course, we have to point out those ideas and those perspectives that my Eros is divine, comes from the divine, that my egoic neurotic shapes are really just slightly distorted impoverished reflections of the divine, of the angel, of the demon, of the image. Of course, it's really important to point out and to be aware that those ideas and perspectives could be corrupted. They can be corrupted, they could be faked, we can be mistaken about that. Just like there were corrupt priests in the Catholic Church at the time of the Protestant Reformation and the Protestant Reformation was pointing fingers and objecting to that. But actually, as I said the other day, that wasn't the main point of the Protestant Reformation. It wasn't an attempt to weed out corrupt priests. Oh, and that's our overhaul while we're doing that. Actually the fundamental idea was theological. The fundamental point was a theological revolution, reformation. And that was this emphasis on the total power of God, on not imprisoning God's total freedom and power. Just so in soul making, the fundamental point is on the possibility. Soul making now, the fundamental point is on the possibility through disciplined practice and sensitivity, the possibility to create and discover as sacred and as divine, as rooted in divine and as divinizable. In other words, with a conception of ontic roots and with lived possibilities of human being. To create and discover as sacred and divine anything. The fundamental point of soul making now is the possibility through disciplined practice and the kind of sensitivity that goes with discipline practice to create, discover, anything as sacred and divine, especially including human being. We're emphasizing today because the sense of human being, the sense of human has, through modernity and even through humanism, secular humanism, the sense of human, humanity has become flattened. First it was divorced from a radically different God, like we said in the Protestant Reformation. Then with the gradual rise of atheistic secularism through different stages, many stages including deism, as some of you probably know, it was simply flattened, not even just divorced from God because God became non-existent, so divorce from God made no sense. It was simply a flat view of the human being. All this has enormous, enormous effects on how we feel, sense and think of ourselves and our humanity. We've used several times over the past four or five years, we've used this idea of telos and to think theologically or to conceive theologically and telos of the human being, for instance the angel out ahead calling me. In Plato there's a kind of idea of telos, of the human moving towards, rising towards if you like, the world of what's called the intelligences, the world of ideas, the realm of ideas which talked about in the Sla and Sol talks, the realm of forms. In some versions of Platonism, near Platonism, there's an idea of the human, of humanity, but in others there's also included the idea of your individual form, the ideal version of you. We talked about that with Sla and Sol, and there's this, you know, that's there in the whole metaphysic and cosmology of Platonism. And again to be rational meant to see that, to acknowledge it, to feel it and to be drawn naturally through seeing it and through love of it and through the Eros for it towards moving towards that. So there's a certain telos, there's a certain natural movement of humanity. This is our destiny, if you like, it's another word for telos. When Aristotle came along after Plato, had a slightly different idea of telos, more, let's see, eventually more biological, if you like, but really in, there's an Aristotelian telos as well, a sort of natural, the idea of a natural inclination or a goal of our nature. We naturally move towards whatever. So those whole ideas that we naturally move towards the Angel, we naturally move towards God, that we're built for this, that this is the natural inclination, the natural way we will grow if we don't distort that. Those ideas, again, were decimated, severed, beginning really, I think, with William Ockham and others. Often it's presented this thing as a kind of argument between what's called nominalists and realists, as if it's a philosophical argument between, some of you one knows, between like the argument about universals and particulars, are universals real? Table, as opposed to this table, this table is clearly a real thing, table as a universal, is it a real thing or is it not a real thing? It's presented these days as if all the fuss was about that, some kind of pretty sort of abstract sounding philosophical argument. Actually it was fundamentally a theological argument again. It had to do with refusing to limit God's power, God's fiat. Fiat means let there be light in Latin. God's ability to just, through God's will, to just decide what happens whenever, wherever, however. So the theological idea was nothing should limit that infinite and endless possibility and power of God's fiat, God's, the inaction of God's will. So if there's a natural telos for the human being, how human beings naturally grow if we don't, if things don't block it, etc., that's actually a limit to God's fiat because then their growth, their salvation, their liberation, their nirvana, whatever you want to call it, and realization their awakening is kind of something that's not entirely dependent on God if there's a human telos. You hear how significant this is? It came from a theological argument about not wanting to limit God's, God's fiat, God's power. And eventually again, over time, that very idea became a seed for this kind of mechanistic universe, because it was only a kind of flat mechanistic universe that was compatible, really fully compatible with this sort of endless and infinite freedom of God's fiat, of God's power. It's complex, I'm oversimplifying because it's also the fact that with the idea of a mechanistic universe came also the encouragement for humans to exercise their power and technology. And we talked about Locke and the instrumental stance and human control, human fear. So it's complex. But still, there was something in the seed idea that had all kinds of implications relative to the implications and consequences about and upon our sense of our humanity. Therefore our sense of our self, our sense of our souls. No more possible the telos of the soul, the calling of the soul. This idea of an angel out ahead completely ruled out. There's a radical duality between God and the human soul. We don't have these, in that view, this idea we have that angel is me and it's not me, ruled out. Whether there's a spark of divinity in me, or there's a natural inclining, natural inclination growth, natural reach to the divine. All these would be kind of impossible views. So again, soul making dharma, what we've done, or this attempt to do is to rehabilitate, to redeem notions like telos and also ethics obviously. But again, with a different ontology and epistemology. We need a different ontology and epistemology in order to make sense of these ideas. We can't just go back to the Middle Ages or the ancient Greece or wherever. So the different ontology and epistemology. And with practice, and with the subtleties and sophistication of practice and what that opens up, and the senses that that opens up in the being. With practice, with care and practice, the Eros opens up the psyche and the Logos, the ideation as well, the idea of things and the idea of human being. So if we just linger, you know, so there's this, pessimism is the right word, regarding morality and human nature that came with, or the group, with the Protestant Reformation. And then historically jumping forward some hundreds of years, there was even more this pessimism with, regarding morality and human nature, that came with Freud. We touched on that the other day. Freud told, you know, the influence of Freud's ideas in Western culture were quite pervasive. And then getting into the 20th century in World War I, World War II, the Holocaust, Stalin, you know, just, there has been a kind of trend of pessimism, regarding morality and human nature. That's one of the trends. There's also been a kind of pessimism, if we want to use that word, regarding the human's, human being's capacity for ontology and epistemology, and what we can hope for there. You know, way starting with Kant, I mean, it goes way before Kant really, but he really, in many ways, what he did philosophically really started to undermine, in a way that became much more popular, undermine the belief that we could really know things as they are, or no reality, and that have a kind of pure knowledge of things. And since Kant it's even grown even more with, well, with postmodernity and other thinkers and lots of things. Once again, soul-making dharma comes in, is born in that kind of crucible, in that kind of soup, in that kind of opening of the historical contingency. And, you know, part of what soul-making dharma says is, you know, not that it's possible to prove absolute truths about ethics, or about ontology, or about epistemology, about human nature, but what is possible through soul-making dharma is that we can, in practice, and in concept, conceptually, relate to these areas, ethics, ontology, epistemology, so that they are fruitful, so that they are meaning-making, and so that they make possible for us a real sense of a genuine ethical nobility and beauty, without one fixed view or truth, either. This is the way things are. Neither totally objective nor subjective, again, but participatory. So that it becomes possible through soul-making dharma, soul-making practice, to have this sense of dimensionality, to have a sense of dimensionality that's potent and trustworthy and a sense of nobility. So it's interesting, I think I just said it very briefly in the Jhana Retreat, you know, you think probably as practitioners of Buddha dharma, it's the history of Buddha dharma that's most relevant to us. But just as much, maybe even more so, the history of Western theology has such an impact on how we sense our existence, how we sense the cosmos, how we sense our humanity. And you know, with all kind of good intentions, the kind of secularization of ethics brought about, you know, a view, an idea that there are no dimensional or transcendent principles or values or virtues. And what's more, there's no possibility of knowing any such dimensions or values. This becomes almost axiomatic. And then the question becomes, how do we organize society so that each person can pursue what she wants, is she they want, and protect their right to do that, to pursue what they want, and their right to decide what it is that they want? How can we organize society in that way without causing civil war or breakdown of social structure? Starting with good intentions, the secularization of ethics and the removal of dimensionality, removing the possibility of knowing any such dimensionality or even the refusal to believe that they exist. And then ethics gets transposed to this, okay, how do we organize society so that we don't just claw each other to death, and there's just chaos. And eventually that goes so far as to become kind of game theory, game theory theories of society or ethics. It's not even ethics anymore, you know, like the prisoner's dilemma. I want to get what I want, so should I trust other people or not, because I know that they want to get what they want, and that might probably conflict with what I want, or it might conflict with what I want. Should I believe them, should I not believe them, should I trust them, should I not, should I team up with them or not? And people think about this now. This is how to think about society. This is how to think about our social predicament. Or you get explanations of altruism like Richard Dawkins' Selfish Gene, which was so popular in the 1980s. Altruism in that view is really what looks like altruism is actually an illusion. It's just the biological evolutionary strategies for survival of the gene, not even the human being. So the nobility of human altruism, it doesn't really exist. What's really going on is this gene is trying to ensure its own survival. It's the selfishness of the gene. There's this whole sort of evolution of thinking that ends up with ideas like that, and game theory, notions of ethics, of society, of economy. Going back, Descartes, Locke, Kant, for them, rationality, the capacity for rationality of a human being was part of what conferred and secured dignity for a human being. They're very rational capabilities, their capacity for rationality. And the Western Enlightenment even more kind of implied, let's not put our belief in superstitions about gods and all this. Let's realize our own dignity as human beings. Again, as time went by, the notion of the human being as having a kind of intrinsic dignity, of most human beings acting in a dignified way most of the time, seemed to get very thin, especially as we moved into the 20th century. Since the idea of a sort of innate human dignity seemed to fail or seemed to be an illusion, can we have, can we provide, can we find, can we create, discover another basis for rescuing our sense of human being, of human worth, of human nobility, of human possibility? Of human essence and depth and then the notion of our place in the cosmos. And again, that's part very much of what soul-making dharma and practice does, is one possibility, one way of opening up, deepening, rescuing the sense of human being. One possibility. But it's tricky, you know, because clearly we just need to look in the newspaper, turn the news on, and it's hard, you know, dignity, human being, nobility, possibility, depravity. So it's tricky, like that whole question of shame that we touched on the other day, if you revisit it a little bit now. So we talked about naming and shaming and how that's kind of, well, in spiritual circles certainly often, some spiritual circles, at least the ones I move in, it might be very looked down on. But you know, when we read what the Buddha has to say about Hiri and Ottapa, it's clear that they have a social dimension and his emphasis on them very much kind of draws on their, their, our place in society and our connection with others in the community. Hiri and Ottapa have very much to do with that. And it might be, just reflecting on this a little bit more, that it might be that naming and shaming may be a part of what keeps a society or a community or a culture healthy and ethically healthy. When there's naming and shaming, it's like, we are clear that this is wrong and that you have done wrong. And it's clear, we're making it clear for everyone to see. It's part of making the ethics clear. So it has a function and it's also a kind of a sign that the ethics is clear, perhaps. And it's conversely kind of our, our shying away from naming and shaming may be due in part, in part to our postmodern barring of a unanimous ethical view, partly a sign of our ethical confusion and lack of basis. So I don't know, maybe in terms of society and community, naming and shaming have their place or can have a place, but again, you just have to hear or read or sometimes witness, you know, how that can move over into something that's completely horrific, completely horrific and naming and shaming has become completely abusive and run away with itself. It's tricky. But you know, in a way it was implied in our wish list for ethics, there needs to be a place for shame and guilt. As the Buddha said, for Hari and Ottapa, guardians of the world he called them. So we want, we need a place for shame and guilt yet to me it needs to not be everything. It's not everything about ethics. So it was a little slightly taken aback to read the Buddha said, all virtuous deeds spring from Hari and Ottapa, spring from shame and moral dread. All virtuous deeds spring from shame and moral dread. All virtuous deeds leaving no place for eros, for our eros for virtues and values or indirectly through an imaginal figure. So I would say we need place too for love and eros, as I said before with respect to virtues and values and ethics. There needs to be a place for shame and guilt but it's not everything, it doesn't take up the whole space. Can we integrate shame and guilt into our soul making dharma conceptual framework into our view as soul questions, as soul issues? See them, feel them, work with them as soul questions and soul issues? Can the whole of ethics be approached with soul first, with an idea and a conception of soul first? The scope of that. So you know, is that what I called the other day, I think I called it superficial shame? I mean it may not feel or seem superficial at all, it may feel like it goes to the core of one's being, so deep the shame. But from our language is that superficial shame, because it doesn't seem, it seems deep but actually doesn't involve soul. Is that superficial shame an impoverished reflection of a soul shame? It's an important question, because it might be, but I don't know, but probably not always, still important to ask. I think I used the phrase healthy shame, again drawing on Hartman etc. But it didn't mean to make a distinction between healthy shame and soul shame. I'd say healthy shame is soul shame. If we really open up what we mean by soul making dharma to include, to incorporate ethics, if we really approach ethics in a way that soul making dharma is really integrated into that approach. And we say healthy shame means soul shame. In other words, it has a sense of the dimensionality and divinity and of our duty to images, to our images. Healthy shame is soul shame. Anytime we feel shame that is healthy, what we mean by healthy, it's a soul shame because it's got this dimensionality, divinity and sense of duty in it, duty to images. And healthy guilt is soul guilt, because again it's got this sense of dimensionality, divinity, of eros, of duty to values and virtues as ideational images. So sure, we can approach all this area of ethics and shame and guilt without soul making conception, soul making practice. But what if we actually bring it right in, really incorporate it, really embrace that whole domain with the soul making dharma conception. And healthy shame is soul shame. It will have that sense and that feel to it. There's dimensionality and divinity here in duty that I've let down. And healthy guilt is soul guilt. And healthy duty, divinity, eros to these ideational images, to these ideas, values, virtues. And again, when I said the other day, sometimes people who are a bit more, I don't know what to call it, who do engage in psychological work and spiritual work and work on their psycho-spiritual process, etc., and a bit more conscious, what they call conscious living. And there can be a sort of, of course, kind of included in that very naturally is, to some extent, an orientation and a devotion to virtues and values. But it's limited without a person even kind of realising it, because their whole conceptual framework doesn't involve a sense of dimensionality. It doesn't incorporate a sense of dimensionality and, or the eros is blocked and the eros is limited. So, yeah, there's warm and kind and, as I said, not arrogant, whatever else I said. But it's somehow just, it's not really on fire. It's not really full. The soul is not really stretched that way. The eros is not really ignited. It's not really soulful. And because, it's because the conceptual framework that's being entertained doesn't have an integrated and central place for dimensionality and maybe the eros is blocked or limited in some way. And this prevents the ethos and prevents the whole sense of ethics from its fullness, prevents the ethics from its fullness. I don't know how that sounds. Does it sound, I don't know, stern or strict or judgmental or forbidding or, you know, we have these kind of puritanical associations with even just the word and the area of ethics. So I don't know how that sounds. But what I really mean is that ethics and the ethos is prevented from its full beauty, from its sense of divinity, from its unfathomability, from its mystery. Because it's not seen as integrated with soul. It's not seen as part of soul. It's not in-souled. So this question, what is the image of ethics? What is the image of ethics that we are operating with, that we are living our life with? What is the image of ethics? Something kind of necessary, it's necessary to care about ethics, it's necessary to, you know, talk about them and have a good solid basis. Something necessary but kind of boring, maybe stern, maybe punitive, something that has to limit, it limits us by its nature. That's what ethics does. It limits what we can do and say and all the rest of it. And itself it's kind of limited in its scope. Or it's a kind of preliminary basis. So you're like, okay, taking care of that, then samadhi and pa, for example. So is it that, what's the image of ethics, or is it something soulful, something beautiful, something infinite in its reaches and its coolings, something we love, something we have ear us for, something soul-making? What does the word magnanimity mean? I'm not sure. It probably means different things and it has mean different things at different times and maybe means different things to different people. Magnanimity, sometimes it just means generosity, it can mean other things as well. But the etymology magnanimus, a big soul, what supports a human being to grow into magnanimity? Big soul means more than a big heart. Big hearted. This person, that person, oh, they've got a big heart. What does it mean to have a big soul? What might it mean to have a big soul? I wonder whether to fully honour human life, for it to have deep dignity, for our sense of our humanity as well to be deeply honoured. It must include a kind of love and ear us for something that's more than my human life, certainly more than my survival. Something of a different order. Something I'm willing even to sacrifice my life for. Again, we have that etymology of the word sacrifice to make sacred. To me, that if there's something that I'm willing to sacrifice my pleasure, my well-being, my happiness even, my life for, my actual, the prolongation of my life. This is part of the realisation of that, the sense of that, the love and commitment for that, whatever that is, but it's another dimension other than just my life. That's part of what it means to fully honour human life, I'm wondering. For life to have deep dignity. But you know, that love and that passion, again, that love and that willing to sacrifice, it's like when we talked about passion. It depends on what the thing is, just to be willing to sacrifice for some cause, well, it depends what the cause is, just to be willing to sacrifice for some sense of this or that, it depends what the this or that are, and the sense of it is. This is related to everything we're talking about, dimensionality and the other wishlist elements and other list of needs about ethics and related to what a human being is, what a human being can be, what a human being should be. In ancient times, they had what's at some point came to be called the honour ethic. And so this, this in a way only applied to a certain strata of society, warriors and maybe knights and rulers, whose life was kind of oriented to and centred on and governed by this honour ethic, the honour and glory. But the central element of that was a willingness to risk one's own life for the sake of. And the honour ethic, there was a hierarchy there that was regarded as someone who was living that way, who was bound by that kind of honour ethic, their life was at a different level than others who were concerned only with their life, their ordinary life and prolonging it. I think Hannah Arendt wrote about this and modified it and talked about the citizen ethic in modern society and that as a kind of parallel of the honour ethic and that relative to sort of work and labour. And she was saying, others have said, modern culture is really defined by what constitutes modern culture is this turning upside down, this pooh pooh-ing of the honour ethic and sort of evening out demolition of the hierarchy there. So again, this flattening of a hierarchical view and affirmation of ordinary life, work, production, family, spouse and children. And higher aims and strivings are criticised. Now, as yesterday pointed out, the historical contingency of our taken for granted sense of ordinary life and its import. For the 18th century, that wasn't really seen and felt and thought of in the ways that we typically do now. Most people kind of agree on. So, you know, it's interesting, you've probably come across this sort of thing, I'm sure most people have, but if you are looking for alternative cancer cures and that sort of thing and there's different websites and people discuss things and sometimes they say, you know, I've got cancer and how much I want to live and very, very common to hear something like, I so want just, I want to live, I want to be here, I want to survive, to hear my daughter's first words, my baby daughter's first words or see her take her first steps and I'm, you know, scared that I won't be able, it grieves me that I won't be able to, that I might not be able to be there for that or her first day of school or her graduation from college or her marriage or her children and my grandchildren, I won't, I won't see them and very common to hear that sort of as a justification, as a reason for why I want to live longer even though the so-called quality of life, which usually means the sort of relative ratio of pleasant to unpleasant is poor but that thing's important, that thing is more important to see the, to see ordinary life, to witness ordinary life in my family. That was given that much import as put forward as a reason to live, as something that made life worthwhile, that qualified as an orientation and a wish, that qualified as the worthy life, a kind of worthy life. This was not thought before sometime in the 18th century and we have to understand this wasn't the case that everyone secretly felt that way and saw things that way and it was a, you know, only until the oppression of the church was lifted that they could then just admit it and all this time they were actually feeling that way and viewing that way and viewing their existence that way and viewing what was most important that way but they just couldn't admit it out loud so they hid it and kept it secret. That wasn't the case, they actually didn't think, people actually didn't think that way, it didn't qualify as something of that import, as something that would qualify as the good life, the beautiful life. This is something that makes life worthwhile, this qualifies as me living a life that's worthwhile. So in view, life or existence, in the sense of what was most important, what qualified as making life worthwhile that way. This is a historically contingent, it's hard for us, or for many of us it would be hard to kind of even grasp, to even stand outside that view. It's so taken for granted, this affirmation, elevation of ordinary life has become so pervasive, so entrenched. Pointing out its historical contingency but what does the fact of its historical contingency imply? What does it actually imply? What we take it to imply actually depends on our view of history, our view of the process of history. That's another question I've gone into that in other talks in recent years but still it's worth acknowledging this, it's worth realising this fact of historical contingency. How we interpret it is another matter but I think it's important to be aware of it. But as I said at some point or over time there evolved a demolition or flattening of hierarchy, values hierarchy of strivings, actually an inversion of hierarchy. There's the affirmation then of ordinary life, work, said work, production, family life and inversion because higher aims and strivings were put down, were criticised. To some extent a flattening and to some extent an inversion evolved of that original hierarchy, that original hierarchy of values. In Francis Bacon in a way the founder of the scientific religion, one of them, and for him science was not the higher pursuit of knowledge, the higher quest to penetrate the mysteries of the universe of the cosmos. Science was for the sake of technological power over nature in the service of ordinary life. So all these trends and movements and developments in history or through history made it less possible to have, conceive of, feel a certain way towards something higher or more important than life, than preserving one's life, than ordinary existence, work, production, family. And again the question I have is what does that do to our sense and our idea of human being, of our humanity? And again with soul making, Dhamma, what does that offer us or open out in terms of possibility for what we might sense and feel and conceive of as higher or larger or more important than say having a long life or surviving physically or having more pleasant and unpleasant sensations or reducing pain or whatever. Soul making Dhamma should, if one's practising right, go right to the heart of that question and then it should open out a sense of that. For me very very potently and clearly it should, in what soul making Dhamma practice opens, that should be one of the things that it opens. The sense of something or things or whatever you're going to call them, dimensions or directions that are higher, larger, more important than my living a long life, than my survival, more important than my not being in pain or reducing pain or whatever. So this question, you know, we'll talk about this different, providing different or attempting to provide different dimensions or not providing any dimensions and the question today is what is the result of any of those dimensions or the refusal to provide dimensions, what's the result with respect to what we might call anthropology and our idea of what it means to be a human being, what we've been talking about today. What is the result also of course for theology, for our sense of divinity or Buddha nature or what's the result for our sense of existence. So the different ideas of dimensions or the refusal of dimension will influence, will have an impact on certainly theologies and the sense of existence but also on the sense of human being and of course it works the other way. Different sense of human being or theology or whatever will provide or disallow certain dimensions and non-dimensions for the ethics. So I haven't talked much about Aristotle in this series of talks, I've talked about a little bit, at least a little bit in the Silar and Sault talks but Aristotelian virtue ethics were as far as I understood ground in a notion of the common good of the polis, of the city state, the nation, basically the city state like Athens or whatever. So this is what, you know, a virtue had to be something which contributed or at least didn't take away from the common good of the city state. Actually he left out slaves and other strata of that society so it was even a smaller view. But you know, I was curious, is the dimensionality there is kind of, is it in lateral number and in how many people or in the service of the nation or the city state as if that's a kind of transcendent object in itself as that provides the dimensionality? Is that related to the citizen ethic perhaps that Hannah Arendt was talking about? The question is what does it do to our sense of human being and our humanity? Or if we think about Pali Canon, Buddha Dharma and the kind of cosmology of karma, of rebirth and the rationale of simplification. These as reason for ethics, well if you act unethically you'll get a bad rebirth, you'll reap bad karma, if you act ethically you'll reap good karma and if you act ethically you're, you know, the complexes of your life and also the agitations and the busyness of your mind will simplify and that simplification will allow practice. That's Samadhi and then Panya and then liberation. You can see the purpose of the ethics is revealing something here as well and that way of understanding Pali Canon Dharma, you know, there's a kind of pragmatic reason for ethics, there's a pragmatic reason for sealer in concern for one's karma with that kind of cosmological notion and also in because it will simplify the consciousness and the life and that will allow meditation and insight and liberation. So it's practical but there's no ontological dimensionality of grounding for the ethics there. Actually something similar that you get in Locke partly in John Locke, there's a kind of grounding in a rational pragmatic hedonism. A lot of people really objected to what he was writing and the way you get that in Epicureanism it's like just follow the pleasure and in good charitable interpretations of Epicureanism. It's just like Pali Canon Buddhism, it's like following the Jhanas, I'll take this pleasure over the pleasure of senses and then the second Jhanas better kind of pleasure than the first etc. One goes up the rungs of the ladder letting go of what has come before because I've got a better pleasure until one actually lets go completely because one's reached the highest kind of pleasure and then one lets go into the kind of so called pleasure of Nibbana. So there's a kind of rational pragmatic hedonism which people vilify John Locke for and also Epicurean, Epicurus for and Epicureanism at least but has its parallels in Pali Canon Buddhism. But the grounding is that's pragmatic rather than what we could call ontological, there's no sense of the good or this higher order that's giving us our ethics in some kind of parallelism. I mean it might be we could say rebirth in a Brahma realm is a kind of deification so it becomes an ontological thing that would be stretching it a little bit. Again, we take the dimension of the possible dimension of rationality, rationality as a dimension and just to point out people think of this in very different ways so that for some of say that the German idealist Kant and others rationality might have had a capacity for rationality, might have had this quasi-numinous character, quasi-holy character. It's a kind of divine faculty or divinely given certain faculty so that rationality itself was almost a potentially in our words a kind of almost a erotic, imaginal object perhaps. What do all these ideas do for all these ideas about dimensions and non-dimensions, what they do for the sense of human being, of humanity, of our humanity? In Platonic ethics and Platonic cosmology it's said that almost every level of being is refracting and reflecting somehow the good, the divine. It's existing as in an analogous way. The world is analogy, the world is sign, the world is partial expression, is refraction, reflection of in a kind of hierarchical order of the divine, of the good, of the ultimately good. We can approach that, we can climb that ladder, we can read the cosmos if you like and that reading of the cosmos, that soul resonating with the orphanies, with the signs and the forms and the refractions and reflections of the good, the divine, allow us to draw closer to the divine and we ourselves can become analogies of our image, of our angel or our demon and in that way reflect, refract the divine, grow towards the divine. So there's also this eros and ineffotability of this transcendent good, this transcendent divine where as human beings we're connected intimately in our being with that divinity, with that Buddha nature, Dhamma Kaya, but we're also separate from it. We're separate and not separate. We're in the image and likeness where analogy, my life, if I live it with soul is an analogy to my angel, it's a reflection of my angel which reflects God, which reflects the Buddha nature, which expresses an attribute of the Dhamma Kaya. So there's both, we're separate and not separate but we're connected in this very intimate way by analogy or potentially by analogy in our being and there's this possibility of direction, of growth towards the divine of theosis, as we call it in the orthodox church. And so you can hear that whole way of thinking about dimensionality as a ground for ethics that construes the human being and our humanity in quite a powerful way that's quite consistent and relatively consistent, much more similar let's say to what we've got in the soul making Dhamma, what can possibly open out for us in soul making Dhamma practice. The senses we can have that open rather than the ideas we start from the senses that can open through practice. Again it's a phenomenological approach rather than starting with metaphysics. When we look at all this, whatever valid reason or support or dimension for ethics one tries to provide, it tends to be related to the conceived purpose of ethics for sure but also the conceived purpose of life. So we think about Pali Canon, Buddha Dhamma. The purpose of life is very much, the purpose of ethics is very much, the given reasons for the purpose of ethics are very much connected to or the principle given reasons for the purpose of ethics are very much connected with what is the purpose of life, what is the purpose of existence? It's to reach Nibbana and in these other systems as well. If you think through that. And then as I said there's been this divorce of ethics from all but does the way we think about ethics certainly it's related to the conceived purpose of ethics. The way we try and provide dimensionality for ethics is certainly related to the conceived purpose of ethics and the conceived purpose of our existence. What does that imply about how we set up law and the purpose of the law and how we conceive of the law? All this is connected and depending on how we think of this that the connection is still whole so it will follow through to how we think of life, how we think of ethics, what dimensionality we give then how we think of what the law is actually trying to accomplish, what legal system is trying to accomplish. All this is connected. Again if we just ask this question so what's possible, what's possible for us as human beings, what's possible in terms of viable, valuable and tenable ways we can conceive of and sense our humanity? What's possible there? What viable, tenable and valuable ways are there for us to conceive of and to sense our human being today now? So much is going to depend on that whether we feel blessed and our sense of existence is blessed and the sense of the cosmos is blessed. All that depends on these questions, depends on these directions and decisions, orientations. If I want to live with a sense of blessedness how can I support that possibility really, genuinely, deeply, robustly? Please consider supporting DharmaSeed with a year-end gift. Your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all. Visit DharmaSeed.org slash donate to learn more. And thanks.

 So again, we're looking at how soul making diamond, soul making practice can be used as an approach to ethics. Soul making diamond both in terms of the philosophy, the conceptual framework and also the nuts and bolts, sensitivities, sensibilities and capabilities amassed and developed in soul making practice, how all that can be brought to bear on the whole question of ethics. And we outlined at the beginning of these ethics talks, we outlined seven or eight kind of needs that an ethical system, that I felt an ethical system should have, seven or eight kind of items on a wish list for an ethical system or an ethical approach. And one of them was dimensionality and we've started to talk a little bit about it and I want to spend more time talking about that today, that particular need, the need to root ethics in some other sense of, some other dimension, something deeper or higher, another level of being, something like that. And the need to have recourse to some other, some sense of dimensionality or some other level to justify, explain, etc. with regard to ethical choices, with regard to ethics as a whole, why ethics, why this ethics, why that choice, etc. And one of the ways, one of the things that's happened historically is that a certain kind of dimensionality provided by what we would call images or we have comptical images and soul making images, a certain kind of dimensionality given historically by angels or daimons or whatever one may call them, as we still call them as well, the imaginal figures, angels, daimons, that kind, the kind of dimensionality they provide as being intermediate between human being, let's say, and the transcendent, ineffable, completely beyond of the ultimate Godhead of the divinity of the Buddha nature, the dharmakaya, whatever you want to say. And that whole dimensionality that they provide just by being there intermediate. And we talked about how we can, how they reflect the attributes of God of this otherwise completely transcendent being of whom or level of whom one cannot ascribe any attributes. To level the attributes of God, the angels, the daimons is refracting, reflecting, radiating those attributes of God. And our possibility as human beings, our birthright as human beings, to be called by angels and to also learn, to learn about and get closer to the attributes of God through the angels and also to reflect and refract those attributes of the dharmakaya. Remember that etymology of the dharmakaya, a body of dharmas, a body of qualities, a body of attributes of a Buddha, of a cosmic Buddha, one could say in the Mahayana. And that we can reflect, express, manifest that through our relationship with the angels, the images. But come the Protestant Reformation, their insistence, their central insistence on the ruling out of any intermediaries between human and God. And then come further the Scientific Revolution and the rise of secularism, the steady slow rise of secularism, that we are left in a position nowadays of needing to kind of legitimize angels, images, daemons as, let's say, teachers or guides of virtue, of value, of ethics. So we've needed to put the whole thing in a new conceptual framework that kind of takes into account and addresses everything that has come between, let's say the Middle Ages, the medieval theology and thinking, the thinking at the time of the Buddha and what we have now in contemporary Western societies. So that I can say, I can share, when I did share about a sense of praying to the angels, that has maybe quite a different sense than it might have had taken literally, you know, hundreds of years ago, perhaps. And I can share that and I can say that sometimes I can sense that, sometimes I can sense that, now I'm being very careful with the language here, sometimes I can sense that I participate in the being of those angels, but that likewise they participate in my being. And looking more carefully, more closely, I can sometimes sense that I participate in their thought, the thought of these angels. I participate in their sensing, in their action, in their speech. And again, likewise, they participate in my thinking, the angels participate in my thought. Sometimes I can sense that, that they participate in my sensing, especially when they're sensing the soul, the angels then are participating in my sensing. And I in theirs, they participate in my action, in my speech and communication. Sometimes I can sense all that. And the whole thing has both a sense and a concept, or undergirded by the imaginal middle way or including the imaginary way, neither real nor not real. So neither real nor not real, but yet I can pray, and yet it is still powerful. That prayer is powerful. So the ontology here and the epistemology here is different. We've had to kind of shape that because of everything that's come between, partly resting on a lot of what's come between. So I want to look a little further into this whole question of how this whole area or element of our wish list, item on our wish list, need list of dimensionality. And I started outlining four sort of ways that dimensionality might have been provided in the past. And I want to pick that up again, and pick that up again. And the point here, just to be sure, it's not, this is definitely not a history lesson. But the question is more, what can we learn here? What might we learn? And learn in the best sense. I mean, learn in terms of what does it imply for our way forward? What might we take from that? What might we have to modify? And as well, what might soul-making dharma offer to these ways, to these possibilities of dimensionalizing, of providing some recourse to some sense of dimension? What ways might soul-making dharma and that whole conceptual framework modify some of these attempts or ways of providing dimension, dimensionality? So that's really the point. And so we talked about these four. One of them was what we call, what has been called Volunterism. In other words, God commanded it. So why is this thing right or wrong to do? Because God commanded it. It's there in the Bible. And this is necessarily a dimension. It should be obvious because God, by His nature in this way of thinking, is a being of a different dimension. And so if God commands it, the command of God, the word of God, is automatically something coming from a different dimension. And that's kind of all the grounding you need, all the sense of dimensionality. Still be clear. There's a very clear dimensionality there. Notice here the epistemology. God commanded it. It's in, how do you know what's in the Bible? So the epistemological recourse, what's the authority about knowledge? Remember what epistemology means? What knowledge can I trust is a reliance on scripture. Now to some of us that sounds completely ridiculous or archaic, but it's very much there in the Buddhist tradition. And if you, there are plenty of Mahayana texts, certainly in Tibetan tradition, probably in the Indian Mahayana as well, I'm pretty sure. In fact, certainly there will be texts devoted just to epistemology. How do we, as I said, epistemology, we need to base our understanding of emptiness and our process with emptiness on an epistemology. How do you, okay, you had this meditation experience, something faded. If you're doing it that way, how do you know you can trust that knowledge? Or you used your logical analytical meditation and you saw it must be empty. How do you know you can trust logic? These are all, need to be epistemologically grounded. And always in these Mahayana texts on epistemology, there's one category of epistemology, one sort of category of valid knowledge, which is scripture. It's just, well, it's in a sutta. The Buddha said it. So that's always regarded that way. To some, this sounds, as I said, kind of completely archaic and a little silly, but it's actually very, very common among most Western Buddhists. It was the recourse to what did the Buddha say and finding something in a sutta, but, and it goes back to the Buddha said. Okay, so I'm just, I've touched on this elsewhere. It's a sensitive subject, but I just want to point out in this voluntaryism, what we're calling that as trying to provide dimensionality, there is this epistemological basis in scripture. And the Buddhist tradition has had that very strongly. Hundreds and hundreds of these are still alive and well, certainly in Asian Buddhism and actually very much in Western, but Western born and Western Buddhist as well. And the ontology regarding God here is usually a kind of very simple, reified God, God just is. Definitely God exists. And it's a more sophisticated ontology in which God kind of exists more than anything else exists. And very occasionally it's extremely sophisticated ontology in the medieval actually pre-made ancient going from pseudo-dionysus, et cetera, and Plato in fact to, well, its roots are there. It wouldn't be, with Dionysus you get this recourse to scripture as well. So it probably started and then maybe Phyla actually, even earlier, Phyla and Alexandra, doesn't matter. Anyway, the nature of God is beyond existing and not existing. And it's a quite sophisticated sort of negative theology that's incorporated. But usually people who put a lot of emphasis on this just very simple, volunteerism, God commanded it, end of story, about what's ethical and what's not. Usually the ontology regarding God is very, very simple, almost startlingly, naively simplistic usually. Okay, but something's quite interesting about this volunteerism because after the Middle Ages and from the start of the Protestant Reformation, something also was central in the thrust of the Protestant Reformation and what they again insisted on. And a lot of what they insisted on was based in a theology of God's total and totally free sovereignty. In other words, God's sovereignty, God's power was completely unimpeded by anything at all. God was free to make the universe any old way, in a completely irrational way. God could have said it's ethical to kill and lie and cheat and steal and commit adultery and not respect your parents. So you could turn the Ten Commandments completely upside down, apart from the first one or two that are actually about God. So God is completely free. There is no sense that what they were reacting to here was a tradition from Platonism and even Pythagoreanism that there's a kind of order in the universe, a rational order, so that the whole creation, if you like, of the universe had to follow a certain, had to be ordered in a certain way. It was inevitable, inevitably flowing or emanating from the very nature of God, was that the universe had to be a certain way. And within that ethics and the good life and virtue, they all had to be a certain way. So the Protestant Reformation was, a lot of what they were insisting on was really based in a sort of really strident reaction to that idea. God is not impelled or constrained or trampled to create the universe in any way at all. There's no rational order that kind of rolls. It's completely God's will and that's a totally free will, totally free power and sovereignty. So it's not then that, there's no rationality or in the sense of a cosmic order or a rational cosmic order in the first sense that I think we touched on the other day, I'll come back to that today. There's no cosmic order that implies or underlies ethics. It's just God's will and that's a completely free will. There's nothing at all in any way that limits or constrains God's power. And so the whole thinking of Protestant Reformation was thinking kind of partly from that very germ. We have to think of God this way, Ockham, William of Ockham and people like that and then following that. Nothing at all to limit God's total, totally free sovereignty and power. Which also meant as we touched on the other day, there's no place then for ceremonies, for ceremonies to make anything holy. There's no place or to be in part or necessary for our salvation. There's no place for sacraments. There's no place for intermediaries as we touched on. There's also no place for human action and human development to bring about salvation. Something completely God-given, completely dependent on the will or the whims of a totally free God. Nothing you can do as a human being to change that. There are no intermediaries, no sacraments, no ceremonies that can help, no development of character, no development of virtues, etc. Nothing at all to limit the sense of God's power, everything completely dependent on God's power. With that, as we touched on briefly, no ceremonies, no sacraments, etc., no intermediaries, no priests and no special human action. No development, no dedicated, intense development in a monastery or anything like that. Made any sense. Salvation comes only from God. Therefore, with that, as a kind of corollary with that, there's this elevation of ordinary life. There's no longer a better kind of life. The really good life is if you can become a monk or a nun and give yourself completely to God or be a priest or whatever it is, or it's the time in church, it's the time of the sacrament, that's the blessed space and something else is not. So there's this elevation then. It's like with the wiping away of any place for ceremony, sacraments, intermediaries, human effort, human striving, human action, with the wiping away of any place for all that. Ordinary life necessarily kind of expands, the place for ordinary life, it necessarily expands to fill that vacuum, if you like. So there's the affirmation of ordinary life, the elevation of ordinary life that comes with and after the Protestant Reformation. These things don't happen overnight there, gradually. That was there from the start, right from the start, and Luther cancelling his monastic celibacy vows and marrying, etc. And the whole Protestant work ethic, etc. It's all tied into this. Now the elevation of ordinary life might sound to us at first like, oh, that's really non-dual. Then you have a really kind of what we would in Dharma language call kind of non-dual approach or view. Because everything kind of sounds like, everything kind of becomes holy. Ordinary life becomes holy. It's very Zen almost, some schools of Zen. But it's interesting, it sounds, it might sound non-dual, but it's actually totally and radically dualistic in its theological origin. There's this infinitely powerful God and then anything else, anything human beings can work to develop or strive to grow in themselves, etc. is irrelevant. So it sounds non-dual. It's coming from a radically dualistic theological origin. And so just to also make just a sort of side point, sometimes people think the Protestant Reformation was in objection to or in reaction to the sort of corruption in the priesthood, etc. But actually it wasn't primarily, that wasn't the main point. The main point was a theological point, the said going back to William of Ockham, etc. And it was about God's power and not wanting to limit God's power. If we think about this idea of voluntarism today, you know, there are people in the world who still think that way from different, from very many different religious traditions. It's just right or it's just wrong because it's there in the scripture. And it's taken very, very sort of simply and concretely like that. And there's very little other thought about ethics or other grounding needed for ethics. And of course, at the same time in our world today, you know, there's, I don't know, billions probably of atheists. So atheism is very prevalent. So such an idea as voluntarism, excuse me, to ground ethics is completely not a viable or sustainable idea nowadays for many people. And as I said, usually, when there's this kind of, when there is a voluntarism alive today, it's usually interpreted again, through a kind of radical duality of human and God and a kind of literalism. And if you remember back, I must have been in the sealer and soul talks probably near the beginning. And I sort of did a little exercise kind of comparing, let's say, someone who was a fundamental terrorist, fundamentalist religious terrorist, and comparing their views, which can sound a very superficial hearing can sound like, oh, they're saying and thinking some of the similar, some similar sort of things that soul making, soul makers seem to say. And just sort of debunking that by going and pointing out the differences there. So if you remember that, I'm not going to do it again. If you remember that, two of the problems with that sort of fundamentalist stance and the two of the differences from soul making dharma were exactly that, the kind of radical duality of human and God, which is not really entertained. It's very difficult to entertain that within soul making dharma context. I mean, you can, but it's sort of even that's within a backdrop of it's not really radically dual, you just sort of temporarily entertaining something that's really hard to sustain within the bigger framework of participation and creation discovery and dependent on way of looking and all that. Radical duality between human and God and literalism are two of the main differences. So I suppose this voluntarism could be reinvigorated through an imaginal, through soul making dharma framework and reinvigorated imaginary with notions of duty and things like that, as they are elements of the imaginal in our framework. But again, you have to be really careful if one chooses to play with that because it really needs all the elements of the imaginal. All the elements of the imaginal, neither real nor not real, which is not literalist, this participation, creation, discovery, humility, we ran through all that in those talks before on the sealer and soul. And it really needs all the elements. So maybe not impossible, but harder today. And certainly I would be a lot less nervous about it if, as I think most people, most people, a lot of people would be nervous about it perhaps, but, um, or nervous about it perhaps, but I would be less if it had, if it was within the soul making dharma framework with all, all those sort of, all the protection and the softening and the flexibility and the wisdom of the soul making dharma framework itself and all the elements in the imaginal. Anyway, that's, that's one we talked about, volunteerism. Second one we talked about, I'm taking them in a different order tonight than last night, uh, was, we talked about the cosmic order and the cosmic order, um, the order of the cosmos being something that, uh, implied and guided our ethical stance, our ethical responses to life and our, and our ethical direction and our, and development of our ethos. So you get this, um, in Plato, you probably get it. I don't know much about it in Pythagoreanism, Pythagoras, Pythagoreanism, whatever it's called, Pythagoras. Anyway, um, uh, but, but certainly you get it in Plato. So we, we, we, the, the cosmic order itself, once we see it, we can't help feel drawn towards the higher using the lower elements of the order as kind of, um, not really rungs, but yes, something like rungs or we, um, they draw us up. Let's put it that way. They draw us up to the higher, uh, towards the, the, the, the ineffable divine. So you get that very much in Plato and in or Platonic philosophy. And then you come to someone like Augustine, Saint Augustine of Hippo. And, uh, it's very much influenced by, uh, by Platonic philosophy. His Christianity was a molding. His theology was a molding really of, um, Platonic and Christian elements. And so this is, so he writes something. Um, so now talking about cosmic order as looking at the possibility of the notions of cosmic order, providing a kind of dimensionality for ethics, providing a sense of other dimension, uh, dimensions which can ground and explain, uh, our ethics and, and, and, uh, what we talked about. So this is from Augustine from his day of Civitart a day. He says, bodily loveliness, attractive, attractive, attractive qualities, bodily loveliness made by God. Okay. Baudily loveliness is made by God, but is never, nevertheless temporal, carnal, and a lesser good. It is wrongly loved if it is loved above God, the eternal inward and lasting good. Just as the covetous man subordinates justice, the, the, the value of justice to his love of gold. Right. Think of someone who doesn't care about justice. He just wants to steal gold or get rich or whatever it is. Just as the covetous man subordinates justice to his love of gold through no fault in the gold, but in himself. So it is with all things. They are all good in themselves and capable of being loved either well or badly. They are loved well when the right order is kept loved badly when this order is upset. Hence, it seems to me that the, that the briefest and truest definition of virtue is that it is the order of love. There's two, two elements there that he's stressing, an order in, in the cosmos in terms of a ranking of what's higher or lower. So to rank the value of justice above gold, above money, above getting rich is appropriate value. Hopefully most of us would tend to agree with that. To rank gold above justice to pursue, to love pursue, you know, getting rich above justice, quite common in the world, is the wrong order. We're loving things and not according to their order. So order and love, cosmic order and love go together. There's an order of things and there's an order of valuing that completely corresponds to that things. And our love needs to be ordered with those scales of the cosmic order of things and their value that goes with it. So one interesting exercise would be to kind of consider how that compares and contrasts with Hartman's scale of values. And for example, the transgressions Hartman talks about of transgressions of lower values being more grievous transgressions than the omission or neglect or failure in higher values. So that if we fail to stretch or aspire to some really high value, that's not such a big sin in Hartman's ideation notion than it is to transgress a lower value, like steel or keel or whatever it is. And Augustine in just that little paragraph from Augustine is a little too short because then we wonder again about things like, you know, how Augustine's conception will, would that eliminate the possibilities of antinomies at the same level? You know, what do we do with that in Augustine's conception? Because there will be certain values that exist at the same level or maybe he's suggesting there aren't. Anyway, that's an interesting kind of exercise. I'm not going to go into elaborating on that or it might be interesting for some of you to explore. So first of all, I just wanted to say, how do you hear that passage from Augustine? Do you hear the kind of beauty of the ideas there or do you hear it as some kind of Christian oppression, anti-physical, anti-body, anti-sexual, etc.? But I can certainly, you know, I didn't grow up feeling oppressed by Christianity because I didn't grow up Christian, but I can hear the beauty in it. There's something very, very beautiful there, very generous, almost very lovely in what he's trying to put out there. This ordered love for things corresponding to their place in the cosmic order and the hierarchy and therefore their value. But how different, you know, is our modern conception? Just notice how different is our modern conception and sense of the cosmos as only ordered by its meaningless and purposeless physical laws. We have a sense, most people are these days, of living in an uncaring, purposeless and meaningless universe without divinity or dimensions other than the physical laws. And physical laws are a kind of dimension. Said the other day and before, you know, the laws that describe an electron's motion under certain forces are a kind of another dimension or can be seen as another dimension, the mathematical laws that describe an electron's motion. It can be seen as another dimension other than the actual material thing of an electron or a muon or a gluon or a pion or whatever particle, quark. Physical laws can be discerned as another dimension. That's all there is in terms of order and dimensionality. So for us, you know, citizens of and children of modernity and postmodernity, the only order in the cosmos is really the physical laws. That's the only order in the cosmos. Tom Caputo, philosopher says, science is all the metaphysics you're going to get or you're allowed. I think his stance is very anti metaphysical as was popular until very recently, I think. And that idea came or grew as a consequence. It developed as a consequence of Descartes and Galileo and others and their decision regarding what is real, what are real objects of knowledge. We touched on that. So when we said this is the only thing that's real, then it becomes all these are the only this is the only way in which the physical universe is that the universe is ordered. Understand they go together. If we just decide only these kinds of things are real, these kinds of things are secondary, these kinds of things are really, really tertiary. So even colour was something secondary because it's something the human perceives. Again, it's not an objective independently existing reality. Like mass or length. And this was the thinking pre relativity, pre quantum mechanics, and they decided what was real. And then you just left with a flat universe of only ordered according to physical laws. So Augustine wants to put love and order together. Love of virtue and order together. Love of things and the cosmic order together. And with respect to love, we do have strong feelings. We have strong love and strong heroes in relationship with what we sense as deep, high, holy, divine as having another dimension. So this initial marriage that correspondence that Augustine wants to make or emphasize, reemphasize between our love for everything, we can love everything, we need to love it in the right order, our love needs to be ordered corresponding to its kind of intrinsic value, which corresponds itself naturally to its place in the cosmic hierarchy, in the cosmic order, the hierarchical order of the cosmos. Actually even if just briefly as an aside, there seems to be an order in reading the Pali Canon and the sense of the cosmos there. The word cosmos means order by the way from the Greek. But reading the Pali Canon, getting a sense of the cosmos, it seems very different cosmos than most Westerners post enlightenment would consider. Post Western enlightenment would consider themselves or feel themselves, sense themselves, take themselves seriously as living in. But the Pali Canon cosmos seems to have different levels of being, divinities, and it seems to be ordered by karma and rebirth and transmigration between levels. You can be reborn in the Brahma heaven level and then in this hell or the lichi hell or whatever it is. These different levels, but still, still there's a hierarchical order of a kind, but it's still the whole thing is kind of purposeless. The cosmos itself is kind of purposeless and not basically or overall good. And that would be a fundamental Augustinian and Platonic notion I think, certainly Augustinian, that the cosmos is good and its ordering is good. In the Pali Canon cosmos there's some kind of order, there's hierarchies, there's different levels of being, etc. But the whole thing is essentially purposeless and not, as I said, fundamentally or kind of taken overall, regarded as good. The cosmos is good. God's work is good. That's not really there. So we've inherited mostly from the West, we don't really inherit Pali Canon cosmos, most people, maybe some do, but most people in the West, you only think this is the sense of order we have in the cosmos, this absence of hierarchy. And it's no wonder it's hard for most of us these days to seriously entertain Augustinian's sense of the ethical life. The ethical life is one that loves all things but loves all things in an ordered way, according to the sense, according to where they are in the hierarchy, where the value is, and loves value values things and loves the value in things in a hierarchically ordered way. It's very hard to seriously entertain that whole conception. So if we, you know, in our postmodern and postmodern predicament, if we're not already sort of fallen into its abyss, we sort of teeter on the brink of postmodern nihilism, both in terms of metaphysics and in terms of ethics. Because we don't have that kind of dimensionality. So thinking about, you know, this cosmic order as a possible dimensionalizing and rooting and kind of guidance for ethics, support for ethics. You know, I think that even the vaguest sensing with soul, the sort of slightest movement into sensing with soul with regard to nature and things of nature, even the vaguest sense of that, the vaguest sort of exploration of that can, you know, get a sense that something like mass species extinction that's going on right now, species extermination, you know, almost runaway climate change, that these are even the slightest vaguest sensing with soul, one would have a sense that these are sins against the order of the cosmos. That would be there because in the, even the vaguest sensing with soul, we're going to have some sense of the holiness of things and the sense of dimensionality shading into divinity and all of that. Species extinction, climate change, could be felt as, whatever the words you want to choose, sins against the order of the cosmos. Sends greater than the sin against the possible use of humanity, that if this bacteria in the Amazon or this fungus that's only found in such a rainforest or such a ecosystem or whatever it is, or if that gets lost to humanity, or if humanity is less pasture land and less drinking water, even greater perhaps than the sin to humanity of that loss or the suffering for animals. There is a sense of a sin against the order of the cosmos, something that goes so deep as a sort of affront and pain to the soul. Of course all three concerns, you know, the concern for the plight of humanity and particularly the poorest in humanity, the marginalised, and of course the concern for the suffering of animals there with their extinction and also just the way we treat animals, industrial farming and all that, of course they're there. But there's something almost of a different order of pain when we sense that we are sinning, we are involved and implicated in this massive sort of unponderable, imponderable transgression against the order of the cosmos. Anyway, so we can have a sense of an ordered cosmos, ordered hierarchically like that very much, we can have that sense in sensing the soul. But in soul making Dharma practice we can also even deliberately move between entertaining any kind of cosmology like Augustine's, cosmology like the sort of flat modern, postmodern one, cosmology like the Pali Canon one. The Cosmopoiesis can come first, we can just entertain a certain concept or a certain vision and a sense, if you like, of what the cosmos is and how it is ordered with practice and you can just move between that and see what opens up, see what happens, see what then the sense is by putting an idea of the cosmos in and putting a cosmological idea in and see what happens to the actual sense of things. With enough soul making Dharma practice and all the sensitivity and receptivity and meditative skill that's developed there, we can actually move, if you like, between different cosmoses deliberately and see what they do, what they do to us, what they do to the heart, what they do to the soul, what they do to the very sense of things, the very sense of matter, all of that. But going back to picking up what Augustine wrote here, he took the example of bodily lovingness or bodies and then very easily we can, or in certain religious traditions and others can be like bodies are not holy. He's not quite saying that, he's putting it on a hierarchy. But with soul making Dharma the question is whether this body, whatever body I'm talking about, mine or my lover's or whatever it is, or even someone who's just attractive to me, the question is whether it's sensed with Eros, whether it's sensed with soul. Remember Eros doesn't mean is way more than sexual attraction. I can have a, I'm sensing this person's body with Eros, may have nothing, there may be no sexual attraction in it whatsoever, but there's Eros there in our sense of the word Eros. So in soul making Dharma the question is whether this body is sensed with soul, is sensed with Eros. And when it is, when there is Eros in our sense, then, and that is allowed to ignite, instigate, catalyze the soul making dynamic, psyche and logos, then there will be a sense of divinity in and through that body. So here we have, again, it's so important, I really want to stress this, you have a sense of there is a sense of a kind of ordering and our love being commensurate and correspondent to that kind of hierarchical ordering in the sense of divinity. But it doesn't, the place, the position of something, this thing or that thing or a body or bodies on that hierarchy does not rest in the thing itself alone independently, inherently, intrinsically. It comes in participation. How am I relating to it? And when I relate and sense with Eros, when I sense with soul, then the divinity is right there in and through that body. And therefore it takes a high place on the hierarchy. It's not the thing itself. It's what's co-created, co-discovered in sensing with soul in the relationship with the thing. Do you understand? This is really, really key in terms of ontology and how soul making dharma is going to or can approach this and all this question of dimensionalizing and cosmic order as possible dimensionally and actually kind of open it up or shake it up in a different way, reorder the sense of order, if you like. So let's linger with that a little bit and the questions of dimensionality and ontology. Because grounding our ethics in the dimensionality of a cosmic hierarchy like Augustine is usually assumed, or usually kind of subsumed in that, is a naive ontology, an ontology which still most people today carry, of independent objective existence. This thing or that thing, in the personalities most people don't believe in, can you have cosmic hierarchy or whatever. But there's a naive ontology assumed or subsumed within that, of independent objective existence. This order, if we're talking about this cosmic order, this hierarchy has independent objective existence. And that, with the scientific revolution and then the Western Enlightenment, seems trashed, that whole notion seems completely trashed. How can a person believe in that? Such a hierarchical cosmic order, as Augustine is talking about, after the scientific revolution and the Western Enlightenment, after they got really embedded in the culture and they developed within the culture. However, as we've talked about many times, now, today, with the developments, for example, in quantum physics, with our understanding of emptiness, as I would understand it, with the developments recently in Western philosophy over the last 50 years or more. All of those, or any one of those, kind of deliver us or open for us the possibility or possibilities of ontologies which don't assume independent objective existence. But rather, kind of, may involve or do involve a more notion of participatory ontology. We participate in creating, discovering reality. So John Wheeler, the great 20th century physicist at the forefront of so many developments and streams of development within quantum physics and general relativity and other areas of modern physics in 20th century, talked about a participatory universe, or the participatory universe. This is the nature of our universe, it's participatory. And let's make this really clear. It doesn't mean, yes, we take part in the universe. We participate in the universe just by existing and by breathing. I breathe in the universe, I breathe it out, I eat it in, I shit it out, whatever it is, drink it in, I pee it out. We participate in society by expressing ourselves and voting. It doesn't mean that. We're talking about what he meant, and we mean something much more, again, radical and fundamental. This subatomic particle, this so-called fundamental particle, this quark, this electron, this muon, this pion, this photon, where it is, what it is, a wave, a particle, whether it is a thing at all, in any sense that we can kind of really use the language of a real thing, how fast it goes, how much it weighs. Its very beingness is dependent on the way we look, the way it's observed. It's dependent on the observed. We participate in the creation of the most fundamental constituents of the universe. That's why we call it the participatory universe. There's a possibility now of different non-naive ontology, which don't assume independent objective existence, but rather assume participatory reality as participatory existence, which is participating in this very deep sense. Soul-making dharma practice both leads to and involves, I would say, loving order in this way, loving what is sensed as highest or divine or whatever words we might use in the cosmic order. It recognizes it's based on this order, this sense of order, sense of divinity, sense of what is, let's say, highest or deepest or whatever, is neither objective nor subjective. We've gone beyond such naive polarities of ontological thinking. It loves order. It loves the high and the deep and the divine and the dimensionalized, but it recognizes that order is neither objective nor subjective and provides also the training to be able to sense in that way, to sense the divinity, to actually sense it, to really have that impact the soul, to recognize it, provides the techniques, the practices to do that, and also to feel, to sense, to open to and handle the eros that comes with it. All of that soul-making dharma kind of allows and supports both in philosophy and in practice. It doesn't need to only transcend the object. This is just a material object. This is just a form. I want the unformed, the unfabricated. Yes, that movement and that possibility, I would say, is very much part of what we're including in soul-making dharma, but it doesn't only need to do that. That's not only where the highest is in the more unfabricated. I don't only need to transcend. It's just one of the possibilities. It certainly doesn't do away with transcendence and dimensionality and just flatten the cosmos or just assume the reality of a flat cosmos. Very loosely, there's a kind of historical parallel to this with Aerya Jaina, again, platonically influenced by Pseudodinosis, and I think he was a monk, Irish monk, and quite a radical novel theologian. In his, there's a very loose parallel here, I'll say, but humans, he would say, are created in the image of God, which means that they can, so to speak, think God's thoughts. If we use our mind well, if we use our soul well, then the thoughts that we have will correspond to God's thoughts because we are made in God's image, and God's thoughts are the structure of the universe. This is a, we get very platonically influenced theology, so that if we use the soul or use the mind well, the order we discover through using our soul and mind well in the universe is just the order that God created and intended. A very loose parallel. With the sensibility of sensing the soul, we, what it does is it opens up our, opens up our trust for our sense of the divinity in things, of the Buddha nature in things. Use whatever language you like here. And that trusting of our sense of the divinity that comes with sensing the soul, sensibility, automatically comes love and reverence towards that sense, towards what we sense as divine. It becomes ethics, a steering of the ethics, an ethical stance, and an ethical rooting in that sense of another dimension. But it's, again, neither objective nor subject, it's participatory. There's a much more sophisticated ontology recognized here. It's based on. I remember, and it must have been, well certainly in the last year, I was in the chemo ward getting chemo in the hospital, and I was sitting next to a guy who also had pancreatic cancer, metastatic pancreatic cancer, and we talked a little bit while we were getting chemo, and he was on a slightly different chemo drug than I was, but essentially the same. We both knew that we were in a process of dying. His process too was quite drawn out. We both of course knew the debilitating and limiting effects of chemo on the body and on the life, really, limiting very much what's possible with the life. So we talked a little bit, and he sort of shrugged and said, well, as long as I can still get around the golf course. I was struck by that. Not that it was very unusual to hear that, but I just noted that in his shrugging and the way he said it and the whole tone of what was conveyed there, there really didn't sound to me like there was much eros or dimensionality there. As long as I can... Yeah, it sucks chemo, and I can't do much in my life, but as long as I can get around the golf course. It didn't sound like much eros or dimensionality, but I want to relate this to what we just said about order and objectivity and subjectivity, because golf might be, it might be, I suppose, an erotic, imaginal object for someone, but for me it would be much easier, it is much easier to see football that way. But let's say football might be that there is, that can be an erotic, imaginal object. I could very much, I can have that sense, and there's dimensionality and divinity there, and even a sense of duty if one is, let's say, that plays football, plays golf. You know, if we talk about, for me it's easier, I can't quite see it in golf, or even if I talk about football, because I can see the beauty of really great football, soccer. You know, it's just startling, breathtaking sometimes, of really great football. What human beings are capable of is sort of beleticism, the athleticism, the gracefulness, with power, tactical shrewdness, you know, extremely quick thinking. I just sort of, how does the mind think so quickly to make these, you know, very sophisticated decisions and reactions like that, the levels of perseverance, all of that. All of that I can really sense with soul, or potentially sense with soul, at times. Really great football. And there's a sense of it. This is refracting the angels. There's something in football or soccer that can be at times, and it could translate this to, could be translated to anything, perhaps, that is somehow refracting the angels. So I'm just using football exams much easier for me than golf, which has never really appealed to me at all. So the point is, it's not intrinsically in the object or the activity, but it's in the subject-object relation. The sense of the angelic function of something, or possible angelic function of something, and then everything that goes with that, that a person might have. So I need to continue with this thing, whatever it is, because there's some imaginal duty or duty to the dame or duty to that angel. And there's a dimensionality there. So it's not intrinsically in the object or the activity, but it's in the subject-object relationship instead. Now someone might hear that and say, well, well, then a serial killer, for example, could claim that that was soul-making for them. But let's, again, bring a little intelligence here and be careful here. The soul-making image, the genuinely imaginal soul-making image. And for example, if one felt one's duty was to play football in life, or whatever. The soul-making image, if one felt one's duty was, we're using some examples, if one felt one's duty was to play football and that through that activity oneself and others could have a sense of angels coming through, then either that soul-making image, it won't actually be football, I would say. Or there will be a sense that if it is football, if the actual image, imaginal image, involves football, there will be a sense, a feeling that it doesn't need to actually be football. If something in the image of football that one might have and have a sense of duty in relation to something in there, say it's message, but I don't like that word, although it's related to the word for angel. Angel means messenger. That it's what the image is showing is something more general. So if it's a genuinely authentically imaginal image that's making one feel like I need to do this, and let's use football as an example, it won't, either won't be football that is the image, it won't be an image of football that's making me feel like my duty is playing football, it will be something more general. Or if it is football, there will be somehow implicit in the image and the understanding of the image, the soul's understanding, relationship with the image, the knowledge will be that the duty is something more general, it doesn't have to be that. So translate that to the serial killer. It could claim it's soul-making, it doesn't really work. If the image does seem to be only football and seem to say only football, it's probably not imaginal. It's probably a rarefied ego image. So if someone is getting images of serial killing and then claiming, but it's only images of serial killing and the duty seems to be serial killing, it's not going to be an imaginal image. It's going to be a rarefied ego, pathological image, not an imaginal image. So when something is genuinely imaginal, there is this sense of meaningfulness, divinity, angelic function, etc. Dimensionality. So I didn't really hear that in what he was saying, but as I said the other day, it's completely taboo to say to someone there's a hierarchy of values and you're not really paying attention to that, you're not really ordering your life in relation to a hierarchy of values. Or even to say there's a hierarchy of a way of relating and a way of sensing different things and you're not doing that. This is taboo in our culture. And this also has to do with, very much to do with origins lie in the Protestant Reformation, this kind of affirmation of ordinary life. Some things now seem unquestionably to be part of a worthwhile life or constitute part of a worthwhile life or lay claim to be, this makes this thing or doing this makes a worthwhile life, it is the good life, the beautiful life. They seem unquestionably in our culture to be so often. But we don't often realize that it's historically contingent. So for example, it was only in the 18th century or beginning in the 18th century, only beginning in the 18th century, that sort of affection for one's spouse and children, which of course was always there, there's always been affection between obviously not every spouse and parents and children, but generally speaking, there's been lots of, as long as humanity has been around, there's been affection for spouse and children, but it was only really in the beginning in the 18th century that it was then started to be considered really important, really one of the things that makes life worthy and that this is a significant constituent or qualification for a worthwhile life, a beautiful life. It just came from this elevation of the idea of ordinary life. But as I said, we don't realize a historical contingency there and something has gotten entrenched and also what's gotten entrenched is this taboo of questioning what makes a worthwhile life and whether you or I are really living a worthwhile life or orienting our lives that way, that becomes socially taboo to suggest that, to bring it up, to question someone else that way. Okay, so then historically there was, as I said, this idea, long-standing idea from ancient times through the Middle Ages, etc., of this hierarchically ordered cosmos. And then with the Scientific Revolution and the Protestant Reformation, there was a collapse of any kind, or for large segments of the population, there was, you know, one couldn't really entertain that idea anymore. There was instead, was an emphasis on order in the universe, but it wasn't hierarchical as Plato and Augustine would have it. So moral philosophers like Locke and Hutchison also emphasized order, the order of the universe, but not hierarchical order, the order they were talking about and tried to invoke as a support for a kind of dimensionalizing, another dimension, a support in another dimension for ethics, was a much more Cartesian order from Descartes, this idea of the universe as a clockwork of interlocking parts that were designed by God to work in a way, these parts of the mechanism, for the mutual preservation and flourishing of, I think, human beings, but I'll come back to that. And again, I have this question of what flourishing means, so that's also very contingent on the philosophy and the sense of dimensionality and all these things are tied together. But basically what we have here is an order that's horizontal and flat and not dimensional. There's not a hierarchical order, there's just a flat order of the cosmos. And with that goes an idea of good, of moral good, of the good life as being only happiness or pleasant sensations. So the good life and the beautiful life is not one which is directed towards the highest oriented, let's say, upward on the scale or on the rungs, on the staircase of the cosmic order. But what is good is only pleasant sensations and happiness. And this was claimed to be a result of, naturally, I'll put that in vertical, is a natural observation of biological and physical systems. This is what human beings want, maybe animals too, only happiness or pleasant sensations. Jeremy Bentham, who was regarded as the father of utilitarianism, is basically that's the philosophy we're only interested in happiness and pleasant sensations, I'll come back to that. But he said, or wrote, wanting anything higher than just simple pleasant pleasure and pleasant sensations, natural pleasant sensations of the body, etc., and happiness, wanting anything higher is just pride or it comes from superstitious fear. So again, we talked about Charles Taylor commenting that a lot of these kinds of philosophies were parasitic. And when Bentham wrote or said that, wanting anything higher in life is just pride or superstitious fear, as it's motivated by pride. You want to think you're better than you are, you want to think human beings are better than they are, or a superstitious fear of being punished or something like that by God. And Charles Taylor points out that this is this idea that Bentham said, this rhetoric and judgment of Bentham there is actually parasitic on the Protestant Reformation's well established ethic of ordinary life. So this elevation of ordinary life, this affirmation of ordinary life had already become well established versus any kind of hierarchical ethics with regard to virtues and values. So Bentham could say something quite polemic like that, but it was already resting on a kind of well established ethic of ordinary life. You'd say, don't try and rise above gross sense pleasures. So there's a shift in order from vertical to horizontal, and with the view of the horizontal order comes also a kind of flattening of what the goal is of ethics, what we need to take care of in society, but also what we need to aim for in ourselves, what we should be aiming for in ourselves, nothing high, just pleasant sensations, just simple happiness, natural happiness. So this is quite interesting, I think, this is very interesting. And post the Reformation there was so much, it was so much, kind of often really quite vitriolic rejection of, for example, asceticism and of high moral goals, for example, the ones what would be espoused by some really devoted religious or spiritual practitioners. It was really a quite scathing rejection of asceticism and high moral goals. Now some of that, of course, was related to this elevation affirmation of ordinary life and this de-dimensionalizing of the hierarchical cosmic order. But some of it, for example, coming from Mortanya or Hume, came more from a kind of psychology where there's like, I need to give myself a break from these high moral standards and this pushing myself and striving to be good and to striving towards high virtues. So the thrust in Mortanya and Hume is often, give me a break, don't be proud, get real, get real about what a human being is and what a human being should strive for and the capacities there. And that attitude is very common today as well. You can hear it in a lot of Dharma voices as well. And there's a kind, sometimes it goes with a kind of despising of what is lofty, a kind of despising of what is noble. I'm using the word noble as in aspiring highly with the dignity of aspiring to high virtues and what's beyond reach. I'm not using noble right now in Hartman's way of using it, we talked about in Sihan Ransol. So I wonder actually quite what's going on here. And I wonder if in fact that whole attitude reflects an anti-libidinal stance, reflects a refusal of Eros. We talked about some pretty short ways in the Eros-an-Fetta talks but it might be in another series. Actually is my philosophy, my Dharma, my ethical thinking, my ethical philosophy and practice, my whole life, is it actually driven by a refusal of Eros and a kind of anti-libidinality, fear of libidinality or imposition of a limit on it? Or is it held, and this whole philosophy, in a very limited range of Eros and libidas? Someone who holds this kind of view doesn't like the idea that the very lofty striving doesn't like the sort of noble despises in some ways, more give myself a break, get real, don't be proud. Sometimes such a person is very friendly, relatively warm, they enjoy socializing, they enjoy a glass of good wine with a good meal, but all of that, the friendliness, the relative warmth, the enjoying socializing the wine and the good meal, that's not what we call Eros. That's not what we call Eros. You can have all that and it looks like the other person's living and they're enjoying company and they're enjoying interaction with human beings and they're warm and they're enjoying simple pleasures of life, food and good food, good wine, whatever, in moderation. But they can still be all that and it's held within the anti-libidinality. The striving ascetic who may be living in solitude or seeking out solitude, who doesn't go for the good wine, etc., seems a little aloof, maybe. The striving ascetic may have much more Eros, much more libido. So I wonder sometimes at least, is it actually this that they're objecting to, they're shrinking from, they're uncomfortable with? The Eros and the libido that go with lofty aspirations, moral aspirations and the elevation of that or the striving towards what is elevated, is it actually an objection to a recoiling from a fear of the Eros and the libido, a refusal of that that's driving things? So that's to me a really, really important question. What's the psychology, what's the soul style that underlies, in this case, the ethical style, the picture of the Dharma, the range of the Dharma, the vision of awakening? We talked about this before, something particular about anti-libidinal stances, anti-libidinal, what would you call, positions of soul or imprisonment of soul? Because if the soul loves soul making, if that's a sort of axiomatic principle, the soul loves soul making, it must love Eros and be okay with Eros in order to let the soul making, in order for soul making to happen, because soul making needs Eros. So an anti-libidinality is kind of a locking of the soul, preventing it or limiting the range of its soul making and therefore limiting the range of what it can sense, what it can view, how it can conceive, how it conceives whatever, ethics, Dharma, human existence, etc. So that's one thing I'm wondering about. But also the second thing, very importantly as well, is that with a soul making Dharma approach to ethics, then there isn't an insistence on an absolute material standard or demand regarding ethics and virtues. It's rather only a kind of soul making Dharma, really only gives us a kind of, hands us a kind of request or invitation to a process, to a practice, to a training in approaching questions of ethics and ethical situations. And that training, I would say, is not more difficult than either Mortania or Hume's trainings in philosophy and literature in introspection. Both of them are, some people regard both of them or one of them as great introspectionists. Masters of the art of introspection. So it's not that ethics imposes an absolute material standard or demand. It's an invitation to a process, a practice that brings a different relationship with the things of the world and different ethical inactions, virtues, etc. But you can get a sense with all this of how there is perhaps a suppression, at least the absence, the disallowing of Eros and love. Maybe the total suppression, the partial suppressing of Eros and love in relation to ethics, in relation to values and virtues. If we think about, actually, I think Francis Bacon was, I think, a Puritan, certainly very influenced by Puritanism. And the whole, he's one of the philosophers who was regarded as really, we can see historically, he really emphasized the sort of instrumental stance. Science and knowledge needs to give us power, power over nature, power to do, power to make this work, technology. And it's just worth pointing out that originally there was a real religious reasoning and motivation behind this instrumental stance. I said he was a Puritan or certainly very influenced by that Puritan outlook. So science is, in this view, the correct and God-willed view and use of things. Correct? Also because it brings human dignity of having rational control, rational control over things, in relation to things, gives a human being dignity. But it's also the correct and God-willed view and use of the things in the world for our preservation and for our pleasure and happiness. So that the instrumental stance was seen as initially still religiously rooted. The instrumental stance meaning how we approach the things of the world, how can we use them, make them part of our technology, technologize them. The instrumental stance originally was part of the way we serve God in creation by preserving ourselves and by preserving God's horizontal order. And there's also the injunction there to treat things as instruments, not as ends in themselves. So you can hear the kind of Puritanical tenor of that. I just want to briefly read something. Again, Charles Tader writing about this is, the instrumental stance in modern culture is supported not just by the new science, that scientific revolution, not just by the dignity attaching to disengage rational control. It was also central to the ethic of ordinary life from its theological origins onwards. I'll explain as time went by, the theological origins got forgotten and theology got jettisoned from all this. But it was central to the ethic of ordinary life from its theological origins on. Performing ordinary life has meant valuing the efficacious control of things by which it is preserved and enhanced, as well as valuing the detachment from purely personal enjoyments, which would blunt our dedication to its general flourishing. This was the religious, Puritanically influenced emergence of the idea of the instrumental stance in relationship and in the context of horizontal order. The God-designed. But then what we have, when the vertical order is abolished and a horizontal order takes primary place in the cosmology, in the view of things, then that horizontal order is not an order of divine signs, of divine forms and ideas. Rather, we're talking about an order. So in other words, it's not that this thing or that event or that person is a refraction of an angel, a sign, a theophany of an angel, an expression, a manifestation of an attribute of God, etc. That's all gone. Rather, the order that we're talking about is parts of a machine. Things become not that, not diaphanous reflections and refractions of particular aspects of divinity, particular attributes of the Dharma-cayo, the Buddha-nature of the divine. Rather, they become parts of a machine whose parts work together to bring about God's plan. It's quite a different view. So this cosmic order is just against, just one dimension. It's what we might call horizontal. It's a clockwork kind of ecosystem view. It's horizontal if we think about an ecosystem. It's still horizontal in the way most people think about it these days. Still might have the top of the food chain as whatever, this animal or whatever. But there's no difference of dimensionality, even though we could draw a food chain. Between the bottom and the top of the food chain, there's no difference of dimensionality there. There's no relative difference in terms of food too and how much. So the whole thing's actually horizontal the way we think about interconnectedness these days and ecosystems. The cosmic order is just this one dimensional horizontal kind of clockwork machine. If that's the case, if that's the view, then something like species extinction is not really a problem unless it affects the functioning of the ecosystem. Unless it affects the functioning of the whole. Unless the function of the whole is impaired. Unless the working of the clock is affected in a way that is problematic enough for us as humans because of our investment and our dependence or as problematic for large other parts of the mechanism. In other words, the whole mechanism itself might be impaired. So the reverence there for order is not reverence in a kind of soul or religious sense. It's a kind of marvelling perhaps at the intricacy of the web of life. The web or the horizontal order of the cosmos. Whether that's regarded as being designed by God or just evolved purely materially without God. It's not reverence in the way that we would use that term. It's the whole mechanisms functioning that is important rather than each of the individual elements being holy just because they are connected to them and related to the divine through their places in order as they would be in a hierarchical order cosmos. Each thing a sign of theophany, a showing of one or other attributes of God. Each expressing an attribute, an aspect, a quality of the Buddha nature of the Dhamma Kaya of what in platonic terms of the intelligences, the thoughts of God. Each thing a sign, a form, a refraction, an expression of that. Think about species extinction and a horizontal view of the cosmos. It only matters if it either that it affects us when we lose that species like the bees. People say, oh if the bees go then the pollination will go and we'll go hungry. But isn't there something else in our care for the bees and the plight of the bees? As a species, a species. Something of a sense of their necessity, their beauty and that beauty has a dimensionality and depth as talked about before when we talked about beauty in other talks, other series. So in a hierarchically ordered cosmos each thing has its value, has its place and it is a refraction of God, the divine. But in a horizontal cosmos, we can lose this species, that species and that whole thing as long as it doesn't affect the whole ecosystem or us. Note also how totally anthropocentric was the view and concern of those who kind of promulgated this horizontalizing of the cosmic order when it first emerged and its relation with ethics. Adam Smith, John Locke, Jeremy Bentham. This idea of everyone's happiness being prioritized but who's the everyone? It's very anthropocentric. Actually it was even more circumscribed than that I would say but anyway. Okay, so there's volunteerism, there's the notion of cosmic order in different ways that can give dimensionality and underpinning to ethics and we talked about how soul making dharma might come in and modify, support, different versions of that. Rationality was another one we mentioned. So rationality as a kind of dimensionality. For someone like Kant, Immanuel Kant, rationality which was very, for him connected with morality and our freedom were the just facets of the same thing for him. But to be rational was more important than to be happy and to have pleasure. So right there you can, you sense this, he's establishing a dimensionality. A dimensionality and rationality, rationality is more important than to be happy or to have pleasurable feelings. So rationality as an attempt or a way of providing dimensionality for ethics and an ability to, again what are we going to root our ethics in? What are we going to have recourse to? What is it going to be supported by and needs to be made sense of by, in another dimension, by its relationship with another dimension, by the implications streaming from another dimension. And so one of them could be just rationality as it was for Kant. Now rationality in the usual way that we would understand it this way is just our ability to think clearly, our ability to make conclusions, deductions, etc. Our ability to be logical. That has an underpinning of ethics, as a dimensionality of ethics. That, you know, human, well presumed human, merely human capacity to do that. But rationality as we conceive it in that way is actually a kind of skill. Unless we're just following a rule that's devised or discovered, rational rule that's devised or discovered by someone else, then for us to be rational is actually we're relying on a skill that we have developed as human beings, a part of it we've been taught in school, etc. You think, okay, that's interesting. If you want to make that a dimension and then comparing the soul making practice, isn't discerning soulfulness or discerning whether something is soul making, whether this sense of virtue is more soul making than that, that value is more soul making than that, or discerning the soul making, the soulfulness in regard to an image, is also a skill. I think most people would think, you know, first reaction on such a thought, yeah, but you know, soul making, the skill in soul making is much, much harder to develop than a skill in logical thinking, in rationality. That was my first thought. But then I thought, well, maybe that's just because of how we've been educated, that that's the norm, that we're taught from an early age. There's a great deal of emphasis in our culture placed on being able to think clearly, rationally, etc., in that sense. So that becomes the norm, and therefore that seems to us much, I'm not sure if this is right, but is it that it's just an education thing? It seems much easier to use our rational intellect in our culture, it seems much easier than to kind of learn all the subtleties and sophistication of soul making dharma practice. I'm not sure, it's really a question. But it's interesting to note that John Locke was also skeptical, so he was a big promoter of human rationality, this capacity to function and use our thinking mind as a basis for ethics. He was one of the main promoters of that, but at the same time he was also skeptical of most humans' ability to be instrumentally rational regarding ethics. So he believed as well that God's law, as it was written in the Bible, as well as God's threat of eternal punishment or eternal reward in hell or heaven, was actually a help from God, a help to humans to make the right choices, because though he was principally promoting rationality, he was also skeptical of human's ability to actually be rational in an instrumental way. So God, in God's mercy, seeing that, God actually then put out these promises of eternal reward if you are ethical and promises of eternal punishment if you're not, and that helped human beings make the right choices. So that's a very interesting point I also want to make, is here was a new idea to base ethics in the dimension of rationality, and even instigated that idea was, I'm not sure if everyone can do this, actually. I think ideally everyone should be able to do this, but I'm actually not sure. So we have recourse to another idea. Also with soul-making approach to ethics, it's like, yeah, ideally it would be great if everyone could be taught soul-making, Dharma, soul-making practice and actually learn that, if the whole culture was so radically, extravagantly, wildly different that that was the case, and still have the thought, hmm, not sure, not sure that everyone would be able to do that. I don't know, it's a question. So I think I mentioned this when we just introduced the notion of rationality as a dimension, as possible dimension, the other day. But again, drawing on Charles Taylor, he makes the distinction, I'm not sure it's his originally, but it might be, between two uses or two meanings of the word rational. There's what we might call procedural, procedural rationality and substantive rationality. So I'll just explain this briefly. Procedure is what I just referred to. The ability to use the mind, use the process of logic and clear rational thinking to deduce something, to decide something. There's a procedure, rationality is a procedure, a way of using the mind, instrumental rationality. On the other hand, substantive rationality is more what someone like Plato and people much earlier than John Locke really meant by rationality. It was really that there is an order to the cosmos, and human beings, to be rational means to perceive that order, perceive that hierarchy, and to conform one's being, one's whole mind and soul and heart and Eros in correspondence with that rational, that order of the cosmos. That's what it meant to be rational, to perceive and to order one's life, rationally meant in correspondence with this cosmic order. So that's substantive rationality. So the word rationality has meant very different things and it's come to be used, if we say rationality as a basis, as a dimension for ethics, and it's come to be used in very different ways. So for example, Philo of Alexander was a very significant figure because he was the first person to combine the Platonic philosophies with the Jewish religion. And so he was actually disregarded in the evolving stream of Jewish theology, but in Christian theology he was absolutely seminal. The first person to kind of integrate those two, the Platonic and the Christian, the New Testament and the Old Testament. Sorry, he did the Old Testament, but later people incorporated the New Testament. So, he said, again, the human mind is akin to God, it's like God's mind. So the Erigene picks up on this idea much later, but his origins are kind of with Philo a little bit, I think. The human mind is akin to God. It's like God because it's made in the image of the divine logos. So it's interesting, the New Testament, John's Gospel begins, in the beginning was the logos, in the beginning was the word. And that idea of logos actually comes from the Platonic thinking, it comes very much from Philo. It's, again, picked up. I don't know who originated, it's not quite clear where it came. Anyway, this idea of human being being made in the image of the divine logos, which means the divine reason, the divine rationality. That's all rooted in the Old Testament, in Genesis, where it says that God made man a bicellar metal hymn in the image of God, in the image of the divine. And later in the medieval times Maimonides interpreted this very much, I think, in a procedural way, actually. In other words, that we are given this rational functioning, and that's what it means to be in the image of the divine, made in the image of the divine. It means we can use our minds in this procedural, rational way. With Philo, I think it probably meant something different, it meant we are made in the image of the divine logos, the divine reason, and therefore we have, to some degree, a capability to receive and discover the truth about realities beyond time and space, in other words, about what exists higher in the cosmic order, the angels, the intelligences, the levels of divinity. So Philo is using a more substantive notion of rationality there. They're very different, procedural rationality, procedural meaning and substantive, very different meaning of the term rationality, but also through history you get, I think, times when they're often used together. When you think about soul-making dharma practice as a sort of process or guide for ethics, you think, okay, it's primarily then, in that language, primarily procedural, because we're really talking about, again, a practice or a procedure, just like using our minds logically as a kind of procedure that we can be trained in. We have some innate capacity for, say, definitely to think logically, to have, you know, for the rational procedure, but we can be trained, and some people are extraordinarily trained in their ability to use the rational mind in a procedural way. So when you think about soul-making dharma practice as a process or guide to ethics, approach to ethics, you think, oh, it's primarily procedural, I guess, because you're doing this practice and you're using the practice to sort of support or discriminate or arrive at an ethical choice. But I guess soul-making dharma practice approach could also be regarded as substantive in, if we borrow Charles Taylor's terms, if we entertain a logos, a conceptual framework, that Eros is epistemologically significant, that it has in John Milbank's words, it's ontologically disclosive. And we talked about this the other day, it's really, really important. If we entertain the idea that truth is this journey rather than a final arriving point, and that together with other navigations, Eros has epistemological significance because it can open up for us the levels of truth. It's the engine for that journey. And we're understanding truth in a participatory way as something that's created, discovered, rather than just discovered. So if we entertain a conceptual framework that involves a different view of Eros and gives it a kind of place, an important place in our ontology and our epistemology. And if we think of truth in this way as more of a journey, an infinite journey into the truth of things, and we appreciate that it's create, discovered, we participate in that. And also we might see soul-making dharma as substantive, as related to something that's true, but the whole notion of truth and how that relation comes about is quite, developed quite differently than I might usually think. So Oregon was one of the great, early Christian theologians, theologians, and he wrote something like, the soul of man has an intuitive longing for God. Actually, this is, I'm quoting now from someone writing about Oregon, a guy called Chadwick. The soul of man has an intuitive longing for God. And Oregon was insistent, he won't believe that this yearning that we have, this Eros that we have can have been somehow implanted in a human being's heart and soul unless it is capable of being satisfied. And then, interesting point, just as each faculty of our senses is related to a specific category of objects, so our naos, which we can translate as our, let's call it our soul knowing, is the correlate of God, so we're set up to move into truth and our Eros is actually implanted by God and it wouldn't be implanted as divine unless it was capable of being satisfied. So again, we can translate that into soul-making terms, it's never, soul-making is never finally satisfied but it gets satisfied on the journey, the infinite journey of soul-making, the infinite journey into truth. We are, and again, in what he's saying, we can have the sense, we will have the sense as we develop soul-making practice of our Eros being divine, having its roots in the divine being given to us by the Buddha nature, by the Dharmakaya, whatever words you like. In the movements of soul-making, as the soul-making dynamic opens further, levels, aspects, beyonds, dimensions open, that Eros is satisfied and then it moves again but there's something in the infinite movement that is not unsatisfying in a deep level but profoundly satisfying. So again, we take these ideas and they have to be understood differently, modified through the understandings and the conceptual framework of soul-making dynamic. The procedural rationality, what Taylor calls the procedural rationality, the Western Enlightenment assumed that that kind of rationality and a throwing off of superstitions and being natural in terms of just what was natural human pleasure, being natural without imposing kind of religious dog-man ideas on top. There was an assumption that that kind of rationality and naturality would bring pleasure and happiness and would also bring the universal good. And obviously there's some truth to that, definitely. A lot of moral progress came from the Western Enlightenment but this kind of faith in that kind of rationality was shaken, I think, by Freud in terms of is it actually possible for that rationality to really rule in the psyche, in the psyche full of other horrors and repressions and kind of bestial uncivilized impulses and movements and realities abiding in the id. So that started to question things a little bit. By the time World War I was finished, the First World War was finished, absolute carnage and devastation and incredible loss of life there. People started to really question whether rationality itself or rationality alone was enough and whether it would just deliver pleasure, happiness and the universal good. In the Western Enlightenment thinkers it was also assumed that disengaged rationality, that sort of stance of the scientific method, that through that a person adopting a disengaged rationality towards their existence would obviously see the bigger picture and in seeing the bigger picture of things they would let go of their selfish interest because they can see the bigger picture. Again, there may be some truth in that but others said that no, the turning and tuning to nature is what allows us to see a bigger picture and let go of selfish interest. Maybe the bigger picture is only ever as big as the conceptual framework's big picture. Maybe what really will rule is the conceptual framework. And in the Enlightenment there was a certain conceptual framework of what the big picture of the universe was and what man's human beings place in that universe was. It's the conceptual framework that will limit what the big picture is, how big the big picture is depends on how big the big picture is in the conceptual framework more than anything. And then again, it's interesting in the soul making dilemma we have this theory or idea that the soul making dynamic, the dynamic of Erosaikilogos will mean that the conceptual framework, whatever conceptual framework we entertain, there will be a breaking of the vessels just through the expansion and the stretching that come with the soul making dynamic, the stretching and the walls of the structures of the conceptual framework and the image and the idea of things through the expansion and deepening fertilization of Saiki and Logos and Eros. There will be a breaking of the vessels, a stretching of the conceptual framework and maybe a breaking of the vessel of the conceptual framework and a new conceptual framework has to be created discovered. So that's in the soul making dharma sort of meta conceptual framework as well. There was a lot of assumptions in the Western Enlightenment. Some of them were born out and some of them clearly historically were, seemed to be, you know, misplaced or only partially valid. So, for Kant, for Immanuel Kant and others, human rationality was God made, God given and God made and was also as an image of God. I think that's what Maimonides took that to mean. But for Kant it certainly was. Human rationality was also for Kant the same as our freedom. Our freedom was bound up with our being rational. We are moral rational agents. That's our fundamental true nature. With Hegel came a little later, human thought and art and religious explorations and expansions of religions, human endeavor in all that is just an expression, a movement of expression of a larger progress or movement of what could be translated as reason, what often is translated as reason. And that's a divine thing. So, whether we take the Kantian view, human rationality is God made. It's part of what it means to be made in the image of God or the sort of bigger Hegelian view that human thought, human rationality, human art, human religion are expressions of a larger movement of kind of cosmic reason developing itself, growing, expressing itself. And that is a kind of divinity. These were prevalent and very powerful views. But then historically what happened was rationality was held up as important and offered as an assumed as a dimension for ethics, as a supporting dimension for ethics without any reference to God. So, the God bit got jettisoned, got cut off. Similarly, the notion of hierarchical order became an interconnected or was dismissed and replaced with an interconnected horizontal order that was designed by God and then eventually just a horizontal order without any reference to God. There's a movement through history. So, just left with rationality, meaning instrumental rationality, what Taylor calls procedural rationality, our ability to think logically. Jean-Jacques Rousseau said, rationality which knows no principle will not raise me above the beasts. So, this is question, which is a very important question, is rationality is our capacity to think logically and clearly and make deductions. Is rationality sufficient as a dimension for ethics, as a soil for ethics, as a dimension that actually provides recourse for ethical thinking and practice? Is rationality sufficient? We still have to decide what are the aims of rationality, what rationality is trying to judge. So, is it that we're just, for example, trying to judge as the utilitarians would say, just increase pleasure, increase something called happiness and decrease suffering without trying to discriminate among all the varieties of happiness and suffering and put them in some order, and why? And if we say all human beings are worthy of respect, then why are we saying that? That has to be given some basis in another dimension. Why are all human beings worthy of respect? For Kant, it was because human beings are, that's the true nature of human beings, that they're rational and that's God given and that's in the image of God. And rationality itself had this kind of, you know, almost semi-numinous quality. It was something almost wholly, it was a thing for Kant almost of another dimension. So we need some kind of metaphysics, I don't know, would people have that view of rationality today, that it's a kind of divinity or divine dimension or even a higher dimension, just our ability to be logical. Is that enough grounding for ethics? Do we need, does ethics need a kind of a better or a more sophisticated or a more powerful or more convincing metaphysics, you know? For example, why all human beings were the respect because of the spark of divinity in them, because of the Buddha nature that they embody, carry, express because they are theophanies, whatever it is. But anyhow, the question I really have is, is rationality sufficient as a dimension? Because nowadays we think of rationality as in a different way than Kant and Hegel. And even Locke, who made it something thinner than Kant and Hegel, came before them. Still had to say, well, okay, but there's this other level of God as well pointing. If we've lost all that, do we not need a better metaphysics to justify why are all human beings worthy of respect? Why are all human beings equally worthy of respect? How are we going to ground that? So again, as I said in the C. L. Soltog's thing, you know, someone like Richard Rorty will try not to have dimensions, very hard, they're absolutely ruled out, you know, flatly and explicitly. There's no recourse to any other level of explanation or meaning or dimension or anything like that. But he ends up kind of talking in circles or betraying himself because he actually, his writing slips and he betrays himself in that. It's impossible not to. So we still, I think, I wonder, is rationality sufficient? I'm not sure. We still need some kind of metaphysics, even if it's a metaphysics of the numerosity of rationality somehow. But then that implies a dimensionality that perhaps even suggests another dimension, you know. So again, soul making now will provide, does provide other metaphysics, other groundings, other dimensions, but in an ontologically novel way. Okay, so we had voluntaries and we had cosmic order, we had rationality and the other one was just the view that we ground ethics just in the simple idea of reducing suffering and increasing pleasure and something called happiness, reducing suffering. And so that's a very, you know, that sounds very Buddhist. These other ideas sound much of a sudden, voluntarism, the Buddhism of the Buddha said is still, you know, active for some people, but you know, but cosmic order and rationality, not really. But a lot of Buddhists were just, that's how they were just, that's the most important thing. That's what guides ethics. That's where we're grounding ethics, just in a fundamental principle of reducing suffering. So let's look at this one. You know, again, there were some assumptions here. Adam Smith, the father of modern economics, father of capitalist economics, he and others assumed a potential harmony of interests. If everyone just pursues, if everyone just simply tries to increase their happiness, increase their pleasure, then society and economy will structure itself in a mutually beneficial way, because there's a potential harmony of interest between human beings. So I don't know if everyone agrees with that. There's again, certain ways it could be true. I'm not sure what Karl Marx would think. And there's ways we can see, well, that really doesn't work. It's not true. Sociologically speaking, economically speaking, politically speaking. But in terms of ethics as well, what about antinomies, which are defined as exactly not a harmony of interests, but a conflict of ethical pools, conflict between values. That's within a person or between two people or groups or whatever it is. And what about hierarchical comparisons, even more important? There's this complete flattening with this kind of view of any kind of means to evaluate or discover or create a sense of hierarchy and hierarchical comparison between different kinds of suffering, different kinds of pleasure, different kinds of happiness. So if we say, you know, suffering is the most important thing, so reducing suffering is the most important thing, that's our compass, that's our purpose, that's the highest value. That's all we need to think about in terms of ethics. So a lot of Buddhists would, if you push them, they would say something like that. And I'd say, well, why? Why is reducing suffering the highest value? Why is that the compass, the purpose, the most important thing? As was pointed out in the last talk and previously in the Sla and Sol talks, it depends on the view of suffering, which depends on ontologies and all kinds of things. So for example, if I'm a staunch materialist, then actually it's hard for me to justify this idea that reducing suffering is important, because really what suffering is, is just a kind of, it has no reality in itself, it's just the movement of particles in the universe, just like anything else is. So again, reducing suffering, making that the highest value, or increasing pleasure, increasing happiness, I have to base that in something else, in another level of ontology, another dimension, to justify it somehow. It also doesn't really help. Reducing suffering, it seems, okay, that's simple, it's really simple, that's my compass in life, that's what I do as a Buddhist perhaps, or whatever, that's how I decide things. But it often won't help very much at all in deciding what to do in a situation. If I do this, this much suffering will follow, if I do that, that much suffering will follow. But actually we need an infinite kind of arithmetic. Who the hell is going to know the full consequences as they play out in the web of existence? And this affects that, and that condition affects that condition, and this incoming condition affects how that condition progresses or not, or what it affects. There's an infinite arithmetic required to then discern which action, in many, many cases. And I think even more importantly, what about this question of hierarchy of suffering? Certainly this infinite calculation that's needed, that's kind of impossible, but what about this hierarchy of suffering? We still need to acknowledge a hierarchy, even if it's just individually determined it's this person's hierarchy. This suffering feels worse to bear, this suffering has not so much impact as that kind of suffering. Even if it's individually determined, we still need to acknowledge that there is a hierarchy, and somehow have a way of sorting through the various kinds of suffering. What about the sufferings of meaninglessness? What about the suffering of a lack of soulfulness in life, of soullessness? What about the suffering of having a sense that I'm not really doing my duty, I have no idea what my duty is, or I do know what it is and I'm just not doing it. How does that measure up in the hierarchy with physical pain as suffering, or with dying early and having a relatively short life, or not being able to go on holiday? How do we demarcate, delineate, measure? There is a hierarchy, even if it's personal. So I think this one, we really need to think a little harder if that's what we say, it's just about reducing suffering. Jeremy Bentham who promoted utilitarianism, this idea, it's just about maximizing happiness, pleasure, minimizing, unpleasant. So that kind of idea, and it can be certain interpretations of buddhadharma, it's just about reducing suffering. It's just very, very simple like that, that's the kind of view that's held, and the answer that will be given, whether it's just the self-suffering or self and others in a kind of more Mahayana, supposedly Mahayana kind of view. So the interpretations of what reducing suffering means and what the motivations are involved in reducing suffering, reducing the unpleasant, this is what human beings want, just reduce the unpleasant vedana, reduce suffering, increase the pleasant vedana. This is a kind of small flat psychology. It won't do, it's too poor. And the idea that we can kind of successfully compute that kind of massive, successfully compute that kind of total suffering from one choice and total suffering from another choice, sort of massive, impossible project of one-dimensional arithmetic, it just doesn't really stand up. So with the Western Enlightenment there was a very strong current within it, utility only, meaning people desire, basic natural desire, it's normal natural desire for people to desire pleasant pleasure and happiness and the absence of pain. And then any conception of the order of things is completely irrelevant. Only the consequences in terms of pleasure and pain. That's what was important, it was not a slogan but somehow it's a utility only. Nothing about cosmic order or anything like that, just the consequences in terms of pleasure and pain. How can we maximise pleasure and something called happiness, how can we minimise pain and unpleasant? Actually this, that whole philosophy and that whole ethical philosophy is really an attempt at a non-dimensionalising. There's no dimensionality there. So I'm not even sure whether I should have included it but it's actually a non-dimensionalising, including it because a lot of people think that way. But the very sense we have of a hierarchy of sufferings, even if it's individual, if mine isn't the same as yours, the sense we have of a hierarchy of sufferings implies it suggests, it hints, it points at some kind of dimensionality, some kind of ordering of values and utilitarianism completely ignores that, completely ignores any possible relative hierarchising of values. And if things are in a hierarchy it's because they're rooted in, somehow correspond to a dimensionality. The sense of a hierarchy of sufferings itself hints, it points to, it suggests. You may have heard a teaching in the Buddha Dhamma, it's fairly common, you realise you're falling, you're falling without a parachute through space, oh my goodness, ahh, massive dukkha, falling. Then at some point you notice there's no ground, there's no ground, I'm just falling but there's no ground, therefore there's no problem because I'm not going to smash into something and die. So falling but there's no ground and often that's given as a teaching, sometimes it's I think given as a teaching on emptiness or groundlessness but actually when you go into what's being taught there it's more teaching about impermanence but either way that doesn't matter. I want to get to something else here. What if, what if the meaning, the highest meaning in life was to recognise that there is no ground so there is no problem, so there's no suffering and maybe if you want you can add that to help and show others that so they realise there's no problem. That's the highest meaning in life, to recognise that there's no ground so there's no problem therefore there's no suffering for yourself and then to show others, to help others see there's no ground so no problems and no suffering. How does that sit with you? So just imagine that, such as people falling through space, really afraid then realising there's no ground and then explaining that to each other so eventually everyone is just falling through space and not without, and without a sense of problem, without dukkha. Just linger with that as the highest meaning of life, moving towards that vision, that moving towards that vision is the highest purpose in life. Just imagine these beings falling through empty space but none have a problem with it, that's the goal. How does that sit with you? What I want to say here is if you feel called to defend this view of the meaning of life, the meaningfulness of life as reducing suffering and helping others to reduce their suffering, just look closer, just look closer. Is this goal of, for example, realising there's nothing to do, no where to go and then there's no suffering, that we're just falling through space, just falling through space but there's no problem, we help each other see there's no problem? Is this goal of not suffering, helping others see no suffering? What I want to ask is if you look closer, if you linger with it and look closer, doesn't it have some other appeal to, for example, when we're not worrying about the falling, when we just realise that we're just falling, going nowhere, nothing to do, no problem, then we sense the beauty or the radiance or the Buddha nature or the holiness, if you don't like that word, the mystery, that the appeal of the less suffering and help others to suffer less, has something that's hiding behind it, that's not being articulated, that is hidden. So you might have to stay with that a little longer but this is one of the sort of central sort of contentions, insistencies, explorations, theses of soul making dharma. There's something often unexpressed, unarticulated, hiding behind the view we have, the conceptual framework we have of Buddha dharma, for example, the way we explain it to ourselves and to others, that's not quite fully illuminated, fully even self honest, let's say, and soul making dharma tries to expose that and point out there's something hiding behind it, there's something that's not being articulated here, usually, or at least that it needs another level, it needs something more than the ending of suffering, even if that's the ending of suffering for all beings. So this is one of the areas where soul making dharma comes in and tries to open things out, give more of what might be needed, offer more of what might be needed. So volunteerism, sense of the order of the cosmos, rationality, decreasing suffering, reducing happiness, these are some of the ideas, some of the ways, sort of dimensionality or rooting of ethics has been offered, and the varieties of them through history, and again, just using them as a sort of framework really, to understand something, open something up, see what soul making dharma and practice can offer into this question of ethical philosophy and practice and the dimensionality that's needed there, dimensionality that we need to ground and root our ethics. Please consider supporting DharmaSeed with a year-end gift. Your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all. Visit DharmaSeed.org slash donate to learn more. And thanks.

 Let's start with a shortish recap and then see how much we get to today. So we're basically putting forward and exploring, elaborating a little bit, soul-making practice, soul-making dharma, sensing with soul as an approach to ethical practice and ethical philosophy, to working with but also thinking about ethics. Actually I do feel that that was implicit in the seeler and soul talks but I, as I said, I felt I was a little too restrained there and a little too held back, modest. I think modest on behalf of soul-making dharma, I think I also have a tendency to assume that what is implicit in what I say or write will be understood by anyone sort of listening or reading, or by most people listening or reading, and that's really not a very good assumption, it's a naive assumption. So it's kind of what I learnt from writing, seeing that freeze, a lot of stuff is just, I thought, obvious conclusions to make or implicit or one could make the connections by oneself, it didn't need me to spell them out but that was clearly almost entirely not true, not the case for people but anyway. So just trying to redress that a little bit and hopefully be more helpful in opening things up. So recapping, sensing with soul as an approach to ethical practice and philosophy and putting that forward and seeing what that might offer. And we said, one of the things we started with in the last talk was that can we expand the notion of what we're actually talking about here, what ethics is, excuse me, what we need to do in thinking about ethics and approaching ethics. Because usually or very commonly these days ethics is thought of and approached as sort of the philosophy or set of guidelines or laws or prescriptions for what to do, what should I do, what ought I to do in this or that situation. So we want to include that, of course, those kinds of questions and ways of approaching those questions, what should I do here, what ought I to do, but included in a much larger question and exploration which is what is of value. I'm not the first person to kind of insist on this expansion. Just in modern times Hartman would say, you know, before you can answer the question, what ought I to do, you have to answer the question, what is of value, right? You need to understand this. It's really important. Think this through if it doesn't make sense. What is of value in life? What, not just what should I do, but what is of value, what should I love because it's valuable or highly valuable or ultimately valuable. And in that, that will imply, it will suggest and it will direct me in terms of what I should do to a large extent. So they have Hartman and they have Charles Taylor, who I mentioned the other day, who is, you know, about expanding the exploration from the ought to do to the good to be or good to love. So not just what ought I to do, but what is it good to be as a human being and what ought I to love, what is it good to love as a human being or should I love. So this is really, really important and crucial, I think, to opening up ethics so it becomes a much more fertile area and more dynamic instead of something that just sort of grinds to a halt or two opposing parties just shouting louder and louder at each other from opposite poles of, you know, some ethical debate, whatever that is. So what's happened is that this question of what is it good to be, what should I, what is it good to love, what makes life worthwhile, what is it to live a really worthwhile life, that question became separated out from the question, what is it right or wrong to do in a certain situation or across the board in all situations. So philosophy has stopped posing that first question, what is it good to be, what is it good to love, what should I love as a human being, what is a worthwhile life. And so certainly it can't give, it doesn't, doesn't even attempt to give any answers, it's stopped asking the question. It's deemed that question irrelevant to ethics and it's not included in ethical philosophy or very rarely. And then gradually one, either philosophers or students of philosophy and then ordinary people, people on the street, it's hard for them to even see a connection between those two questions. What is it good to be and good to love and what ought I to do, what's right or wrong in a certain situation. You can see a connection there. So if it's not obvious, do you think it through and hopefully we'll get more obvious as we're talking, but to say on a recent issue, to think on your toes, meaning engage, actually we learn a lot more when we think actively. So with all that and with the, you know, as the years of modernity grew, went on and then postmodernity, etc., if we call it, and then almost agreed upon in modern, modern, the cultures of modernity, that we cannot, no one can impose X or Y, this or that, regarding what people should strive for, what they should aspire for. We cannot, that cannot be imposed universally by anybody. But it cannot be even imposed on anyone else. Not even that it can't be imposed universally, it can't be imposed by any individual or another individual anymore. That brings with it a great freedom. We're not all obliged to follow the same view about what is most worthwhile, what's the thing we really should be aspiring for. This is really better and if you're not up to it or a little bit weak or a little bit stupid, you don't really get that. So you settle for a second class life in some sense. So we have the gift of a great freedom these days because there is this, if you like, imposition of the rule that we can't, no one can impose what we should strive for or should aspire for, what is the best thing. So we have a kind of imposition about barring an imposition. And there's a freedom, there's a great freedom for us that's opened up, a great space, multi-directional possibilities that have opened up for our life, for how we construe our life because of that, because of that debarring, disallowing of any imposition from anyone onto anyone. Of course in other religious cultures, some still around, that's much less the case. And then there's a lot of in-between areas as well. But certainly in secular dominated society, that is the case. But there's a lot of grey areas, societies that are sort of religious in some ways or sort of religious in some ways and very secular in other ways. It's quite common these days. So it brings a freedom but also brings massive, massive problems, huge, wide and deep problems. I'll come back to that. But just to get a sense of this, if you're not quite sure that you understand this or you get what it's pointing to, just compare. Notice how acceptable it is and how common it is to argue for some people, or one person or a group of people, to argue with another person or another group of people, argue and accuse them of doing something ethically wrong. And then the other person arguing back or whatever. That's, okay, it's not often unpleasant, but it's a perfectly acceptable thing to do in our society and it's really quite common. It goes on all the time, of course. But consider how unacceptable it is and how very uncommon it is to accuse another or others of living a life or lives that are not worthwhile. You're not allowed to do that. Look at your life. Actually, you're really not living a life that has any deep meaningfulness. It's not a worthy life. It's not a worthwhile life. This is not acceptable to say to someone and it's very, very uncommon to actually say it to someone. It's even less probably uncommon to even think it because we're barred from that kind of view. It would be unheard of someone saying, well, I see you have family and you have kids and you look after them and you have fun and you have lots of experiences and you travel and you're relatively kind, but actually it's kind of meaningless. It's not a worthwhile life, what you're living. This is completely unacceptable in our society and pretty much unheard of. This gives you a sense of the divorce here and the division of these two questions, how far it's gone in our society. So what happens is that this first question about a worthwhile life, about what's good to be and good to love, what ought I to love, should I aspire to, what's the best thing to aspire to. This is actually forgotten and often then it's not given attention. The question is forgotten and it's not given attention to. And on a social level, what you then get is a kind of directionless society without any basis or substantial basis, deep soil, deep fundamental basis on which to erect an ethics or even decide about ethics. And there's more and more advances of technology and consumerism and global population and globalization foist on us, thrust on us different ethical emergencies, dilemmas, situations that need response. And we have less and less of a soil, of a foundation on which to grapple with such issues. So on a social level, on a societal level, we get a kind of rudderlessness. Not only without rudder, we are without even any training in how to use a rudder. And so, but it's generally said that people kind of, people should decide that question for themselves about what's worthwhile, what it's good to be, what it's good to love, to aspire for, to strive for, what's a really meaningful life. But what does that decide for themselves really mean? Is it something that they really really ponder with all their heart and mind and soul? Decide for themselves. We decide for ourselves. Or do we just kind of not think about it much? Or think about it a little bit in our teens and then kind of maybe get pulled by something, following something, as colleagues are just following the Vedana, following the pleasant Vedana, avoiding the unpleasant. What actually happens to that whole question? That's quite interesting. It's not black and white. So some people, yeah, you should ask them, what's a beautiful life? As I asked in the Seeran Sultos, when you think of a beautiful life or the good life? Yeah, it's good to be rich. It's good to be handsome or beautiful. It's good to be popular, maybe even famous if I can. It's good to have this and that and other material things. And it's good to have and get pleasant and interesting experiences and travel and all that. That would be one answer. Slightly or more, more, an answer with more kind of consciousness, more from a life of consciousness would maybe answer something like, or it's not even an answer, it's more like a way one is living, has become incorporated into the direction and the choices of one's life to a certain extent. So one might say, which is spiritual practitioners, Buddhist, etc. So it's good, it's good to be kind. It's good to be a warm person. It's not good to be arrogant. It's good to be helpful to the world in some way. It's good to be relatively confident so I can actually manifest that kindness and warmth and help. So what we recognize there is the language of values and virtues and the ideas, but they're only kind of half anchored in a dimensionality. It's just good to be those things. It's appealing to be kind, warm, not arrogant, helpful, relatively confident. So the language of values and virtues and those kinds of ideas, but it's only half anchored in dimensionality and therefore it's only kind of half hearted. Yes, this person might appear kind and warm and not arrogant and helpful and relatively confident and all those things. This person has done that, achieved that. It's good. Maybe it took them a little work. Maybe not so much. But there's something, because it was only half anchored, only half rooted in a deep dimensionality, it's only half hearted their attitude to those values and virtues. It's only half sold. S-O-U-L-E-D. Or there may be, you know, and or there may be kind of dim or vague sense of the dimensionality and divinity of those values, virtues, qualities, kindness, warmth. Let's put it in the positive, say, you know, relative humility, helpfulness, confidence. So there's maybe a dim or vague sense of their dimensionality or divinity. But neither the conceptual framework around their dimensionality nor the eros in relationship to them, and those things are completely related, the conceptual framework and the eros, neither the conceptual framework nor the eros are allowed to operate fully, possibly for all kinds of different reasons, a block to the eros, a conceptual framework that one hasn't troubled to. To think through because one's just adopted bits and bobs of other conceptual frameworks and sort of has a bit of a hodgepodge that remains a bit incoherent and therefore not as powerful and as galvanizing and as delivering as it could be. This is actually relatively common, relatively common among people who would consider this as, for example, you know, Buddhist practitioners, etc. What's rarer among Buddhists certainly in the West is another type or another kind of response to all this. And it's rarer but exists in certain, let's say, Abhidharma dominated schools of Buddhism. So if even a Western practitioner has kind of been saturated or kind of open to that so much, it begins to really pervade their way of thinking. Then they do think a lot perhaps about when thinking what's the good life, what's the what's really worthwhile, it's with a maximization of positive qualities of the citta, with maximization of mind moments of positive qualities, this mind moment of kindness, this mind moment of helpfulness, this mind moment of compassion, etc. And a minimizing of negative qualities or minimizing of mind moments dominated by negative qualities as they're classified by the Abhidharma. And the whole way of thinking about the thing is as if it's some kind of mechanical system. And so these people are much less rare in certain insight meditation circles. In other insight meditation circles, you'll come across them quite a lot. So it depends what circles you move in. But it could well be that someone listening to a person like that is actually a little, it sounds almost scary, it sounds so one dimensional. It's a kind of machine like notion, logos of the human being and this is supposed to this mechanical system of sort of maximizing the positive mind moments and minimizing the negative moments is supposed to somehow deliver us to nibbana. And person can come away and feel like, whoa, this, they're making all the right noises as far as Buddhist philosophy is concerned, I guess they're making, you know, it kind of gels with the teachings but there's something almost ghoulish about it. You know, ghost like almost as monstrous in human Frankenstein like there's something hollowed out in the human being there. This is somehow not a beautiful life somehow it's almost not quite human. And for all the sort of what sounds like carefully, precisely incisive talk about essentially about virtues as this sounds like a very careful discriminating precise and intelligence at work somehow also sounds in some kind of a sparklingly stupid in some way. Or, you know, the whole thing, this whole talk about worthwhile life and values and virtues and aspirations strive can just go for a person right into the inner critic, and the inner critic can just appropriate that whole, those whole, that whole set of ideas and that whole question and just turn on oneself and attack one attack the inner critic attacks, attacks the being in that way. And the whole thing just gets very tight, very contracted, very self depreciating and self destructive. Also, not very soulful at all, just as that certain kinds of Abhidhamma dominated Buddhists might come across as what we would call extremely unsoulful. Similarly, someone who's not even thinking that way can just, in a critic, in a critic can just hijack the whole conversation and that's not so full at all. But this divorce, this split and then as a jettisoning and forgetting or ignoring or a kind of debarring from approaching this first question. What is it good to be? What is a worthwhile life? What is a beautiful life? What is of utmost value, etc. This, that, you know, this debarring from approaching that, relegating that, forgetting of that, or only kind of half heartedly thinking about and including that. This, I think, is part, a part of the wider and deeper great crisis of modernity and postmodernity. So we can easily talk, or nowadays, modernist and postmodernist culture, we can easily talk about the need to reduce suffering. But how do we calculate that? How do we compare different sufferings, different kinds of sufferings? What even are the different kinds of sufferings? That's related to what are the different kinds of value, of meaningfulness? How do they stand in relationship to each other? You can talk again and it sounds very good, wanting to reduce suffering or wanting to, you know, support human flourishing. That's another kind of modernist and postmodern trope, even. Human flourishing. What on earth does human flourishing mean? What does it mean? Unless you're talking about just biological survival, which a question of, well, we can't, we can have a very poor understanding of what human flourishing means, good as it sounds, and important as it sounds, and sort of wondrously enlightened and noble and modern as it sounds. But unless we actually go into this question of what is a value, what is really good, what is the ultimate good, what makes a life really worthwhile, we cannot possibly decide what human flourishing involves. So that's one big need is to expand the conversation. So there's two questions, not just what I ought to do, but what is good to be, good, what I ought to love, are included and put together, and the one is a subset of the other. And the second thing we talked about was just what would be a list of wishes or needs for an ethical system to be incorporated into ethical practice. And I ran through a list of, depending on how you count it, six or seven. So if we include this expansion of the, excuse me, of the domain of what ethics means and what we just talked about. And then there's also, and then there's also other needs for an ethical system, I would say. It needs to, it needs to be more than a legal system. We need to be talking about something that's more than law and more than just rights. My rights to this, your rights to that, and combating rights. It needs to include the possibility, secondly, of, we say, sins of omission. What it really means is a sort of direction, the possibility, space for higher aspiration, for growth, ethically. Third, it needs to include and engage our emotions, our whole, the whole range of our emotional life and our heart capacity. It needs to be very much a part of what we bring to ethics and what ethics actually involves for us. But it needs to be also more than that, more than just our emotions or just governed by emotions, more than just involving our emotions as instrument and guide. And we also said that another need is that there needs to be, we need to be talking about, thinking about and practicing ethics in a way that a love of ethics and even eros for ethics or for values and virtues and living ethically is allowed to come in as given space and is honored. This is not just natural for it to be there, but it's actually necessary, intrinsic, and necessary. And then we also talked about dimensionality, and that's mostly what I want to start talking about today when I get to it. We need some kind of rooting in some kind of other dimension, some kind of sense of dimensionality to the whole notion of ethics. Ethics needs rooting in some other dimensions. And all this needs a kind of ontologies and epistemologies that ground it and that make sense of it. And if we're Buddhists, that means our ontology needs to be more than just saying everything's empty. And lastly, that all this, again, another need is that it's related to the sense of what a human being is and what a human being can be. So all those, depending on how we count, seven or eight needs. And I said they're not, you can't go through them in a linear order, at least I can't see a way of going through them in a linear order. And they're not really separate, so they involve and imply each other these different needs. For example, you know, we talked about emotions the other day, and I talked about the example of a grief ritual. And there's a kind of grief ritual conceived as and functioning as effectively a space where people can really let their grief rip, where they can cry or even, you know, feel very deeply, feel emotions deeply and not be shamed for that, maybe even be held for that. There's that kind of grief ritual, so conceived, so functioning. And there's another kind of grief ritual, which is more to contextualize the grief. And part of the way it puts the grief into context is by connecting levels. And that would be exactly connecting levels, for example, of human being and, you know, more soulful being or spiritual being, connecting levels in the cosmos, etc. Between matter and whatever we're going to say, matter and soul, whatever. But other rituals function to connect levels and then even to transform levels. And partly what they do then is they contextualize, and such a grief ritual will actually is conceived and probably won't function in the same way as the first kind of grief ritual. It won't give rise to such a great amount of emotion, etc., and tears. But it's still extremely important, extremely important, I would say. So they're both important. There's something about the second one that's easily overlooked. So emotions are not always the most important thing. And again, in the absence of a place for dimensionality, because that's what the second kind of ritual does, is it connects dimensions. Or it gives dimensionality, and that's part of the contextualizing of grief or contextualizing of matter or contextualizing of life or contextualizing of death or whatever it is. But in the absence of a place for dimensionality, then our conceptual framework, again, implicit or explicit, whether it's conscious and explicitly spelled out or implicit. It can become limited and limiting, even when we're very well intended. I just really need to feel our emotions about species loss or whatever it is. Species extermination. It's very well intended, but there's something, I'm not understanding, there's more to this than my emotion of grief, no matter how deep and bottomless the grief can feel. Actually, the bottomlessness of the grief may be a clue that another dimension is needed. Until that other dimension is conceived and sensed, even if both the conception and the sense are vague, until then that grief will be literally bottomless, because it's not contacting another dimension. It will be an example, how these different needs are not separate. The question of emotionality, the place of emotions is very connected to the place of the need for dimensionality. It's actually a million different examples here, but they're really not separate. So I don't think there's a linear way through this. When we come to thinking about how could we approach ethics through sensing the soul, through soul-making dharma and practice, first of all, a reminder regarding the soul-making dharma approach, a reminder that this was all arrived at, or is being arrived at, through what we call a phenomenological approach, in other words, through our experience. For some of us, it was arrived at through just the experience of appearances, of experiences, of perceptions, the whole ways of looking and fabrication notion, which is what I call the phenomenological approach, as far as it relates to emptiness, just staying with that phenomenological approach, all the way to the unfabricated, past the unfabricated, and then opening out and legitimizing the possibility of imaginal practice. So for some, the whole thing is just based on one phenomenological approach, or rather a thread that just evolves. Or the phenomenological approach, in the sense, based on experience of having images and then paying attention to, hmm, these images sometimes feel a certain way, or I notice certain things about them, and that's what we'll begin to call, that's what makes them imaginal, the 28 elements, etc. That's, and other things, not included in the list of the 28. I'm just going phenomenologically, I'm just going from my experience, including the experience of, this is important, there's something about images when they come like this, when they're imaginal, that's important. So all this, just as a reminder, was arrived at by, through phenomenological approaches, together with a kind of just bold and vigorous questioning of typical assumptions that we have in our culture, or that we have in our subcultures, dharma or otherwise. Typical logoi. So it was really just arrived at by, through phenomenology, I mean through our experience, and through, and through questioning certain inherited sort of indoctrinations. It was not arrived at through some kind of abstract metaphysical speculation. So it's important not to lose sight of that in this day and age, where abstract metaphysical speculation has such a, as for hundreds of years now, such a bad press. When we come to, when we come to think about, okay, soul making dharma approach to ethics, and we said, well, basically, there's, you could say, broadly speaking, there's, we could divide that into two, there's one is through working with the imaginal figure, and the other is through the sense of values or virtues becoming imaginal ideas, the ideational imaginal. So two broad ways. And just very, very briefly to say, well, what does that mean in practice? So for example, what does that mean in practice with regard to ethics? How would I, how would I bring such a teaching and approach, such teachings and approaches to bear on ethics? So, excuse me, very, very sketchily. Let's say either I feel drawn to do or X, whatever it is, to express something, to write something, to do something, to refuse to do something, whatever it is, whatever X is, I feel drawn to do that, though I can see some ethical reasons why I shouldn't do that. Okay, so here's my ethical dilemma. Is there an image, an imaginal image, related to doing X, related to doing X? Again, it might be the very crucible of the not knowing and the heat of the situation, the pressure of the situation, I feel in the soul that gives birth, that in the in the alchemy of the heat and the pressure in the crucible, it gives birth to an image, it gives rise to an image. Is there an image related to doing X? It might be of doing it, it's related to doing X. Is it a soul making image? Is it what we call the authentic imaginal? Is it genuine imaginal? Are all the elements, are all the elements there? We have to be so careful with this, so careful. So is there a sense of duty in relation to that image? And what's the sense of the refraction of the duty? Am I taking it literally? Am I taking it concretely? Is there autonomy of self? Do I have a choice here? Is there humility? Is there fullness of intention? These are really, I'm just selecting some of the really, really obviously important elements there. Is there fullness of intention here? Why do I want to do X? Is there the fullness of intention? Okay, so that's really a question. I have to explore it, imagine. Is there an image? And is that really a truly imaginal image with all the elements there? And even then, that's not quite enough. What's the refraction, etc? And then maybe one thinks about not doing X, whatever X is, and maybe there is an image related to that. Or maybe actually there isn't an image, and that's partly why it's not, one feels not so cool that way. One can still see that ethically one could make a point of it's that's still important to not do X. So maybe there's a sense of values there. So if there's not an image, it's like, what are the values that are related to not doing X? Not doing X expresses or upholds certain ethical values. And can I sense into those values with soul? Can I relate to those imaginal ideas, those values, those virtues with soul? So even though doing X might be actually an imaginal figure, not doing X might maybe an imaginal figure, maybe just a sense of the ideational imaginal. But I have to really, really, you know, again, work the practice with all the sophistication, all the care, and all the subtlety of attention, and all that attunement. And then compare the soulfulness, compare the sense of soul making either way, and use that as a guide to ethical choice. Or it might be that here's an ethical choice that I'm needing to make, here's some situation in my life, and I can see values both sides in either branch of this forking of the road. Choose this, there's values, choose that, there's values. There is what Hartman would call an antinomy. There's a moral antinomy there, exactly that. Actually it might actually be a question of hierarchical difference. Either way, actually, it doesn't matter. And can I sense with soul into each value and each choice, the imaginal idea, the ideational image of each value and each choice, and do that very carefully. I see, I sense the values on both sides, it's either an antinomy or maybe a hierarchy, hierarchical choice, but I sense what Hartman would call an antinomy versus a hierarchy. Or a hierarchy. But I'm sensing each of these imaginal ideas, these values, each choice, I'm sensing it with soul as carefully as I can, again I'm comparing the soulfulness, soulfulness on each side. So very, very briefly that would be a way to proceed very sketchily. It's the kind of thing we're talking about as a basic idea. The kinds of thing we're talking about as a basic idea. But let's stay with the, if we think about sensing with soul, as I said, we can divide it up as an approach broadly into working with, well, if we think about sensing with soul approach to ethics, we can divide it up broadly into an approach with an imaginal figure, an approach with an imaginal idea, virtues or values. So if we talk about the first, let's just not go too fast, let's spend a little time with the first of those, working with an imaginal figure. An imaginal figure has an ethos, it has an ethos, and it has an ethical perspective. That's partly why values is one of the 28 elements of the imaginal. An imaginal figure has an ethos and it has an ethical perspective, this figure, that monster, that snake, whatever it is, that flower, that tree. So there's another possibility for practice here that I would like to suggest and just again sketch some instructions. So we've talked about, you're familiar by now with the practice of, sometimes we call it tunas, sometimes we call it the balance of attention. I'd like to introduce the practice of threenas, okay, and a balance of attention within threenas. In a situation, so he's really talking about practice now, he's in a situation, I might, here I am, maybe I'm with someone else, or I'm having some kind of dialogue with someone else, or they're saying something to me, or it's a difficult interaction, whatever, some kind of situation. There's an other, there's myself, and then there's a third, which is an imaginal figure that has come to me. And it might be an old imaginal figure that I've known for years or one that's just come very recently or even in that moment perhaps, but... And can I play with the balance of attention, the sort of relative weighting, W, E, I, G, H, T, I, and G, the relative weighting of my attention between the three. So what is it? I'm here with this other person in this situation, or here with this situation, 10% of my attention, let's say with the imaginal figure, and the other divided between myself and the other, myself as regular human being, or divide three ways equally, 33% each, or 50% with the imaginal figure, or whatever. So it's similar to the two-ness balance of attention exercise, but now it's three-ness. And the question is, what then happens to my sense of the situation? What then happens to my sense of the situation with this other person or some other situation? So one could do it in real time, in other words, this is going on now, I'm putting myself in a situation and trying this. So I think I gave an example several times over the recent years of just that image that I have of me as a jazz musician, which is actually kind of its real life, its memory. I was a jazz musician, but it's become image for me in all kinds of ways, in very rich ways, and sometimes difficult ways, and sometimes just very beautiful ways. But sometimes I think I shared a couple of times that, you know, sometimes that might come in, that image of jazz musician, just a tiny little bit in the very background, let's say in an interview, in a Dharma interview. And it's just very much there in the background, but it's affecting my whole sense of the situation, and how I respond, and the whole dance of the interaction. It's very, very subtle. So that would be an example. But one could do, so that's using it in the now, because one could do this, in other words, here's a present situation, and one's using an image, it's a past image, one's resurrecting it deliberately, deliberately calling it to life in the moment, and then just having it be in the background, or more in the foreground, or whatever it is, for a situation that's happening now. One can also do this with a memory of a situation, a memory perhaps of a difficult situation, or a confusing situation, or one that just we ended up feeling very contracted from, or we ended up judging ourselves, or whatever it is. So that's one thing, it's just bringing the image into the situation, if you like, then playing with the balance of attention, seeing how does it affect the sense of the situation. Playing with the balance of attention three ways, and how do the relative balances affect the sense of the situation, whether it's the memory of a situation, or a situation in the present life. Then there's also the possibility here, can I sense into the imaginal figures perspective, their feelings, their evaluation of things. So it might be the imaginal figures evaluation of me, the imaginal figures evaluation of my stuff, or even my old stuff, the place where I trip up, the place where I get caught again, how do they see it? What's their perspective on it? On my stuff, my difficulties, my mistakes, I feel like if I'm doing it from here, I feel like I did make a mistake there. Can I get a sense of the imaginal figures perspectives, feelings and evaluations on me, my stuff, my difficulties, my blocks, my mistakes, etc. Can I get a sense of the imaginal perspectives feeling and perspectives of the other? Can I get a sense of the imaginal figures perspectives and feelings and evaluation of the whole situation? Whether it's an obviously ethical situation or not. I think there's a lot of potential here. Can I enter into the imaginal figure inhabited see through its eyes, sense through its senses feel through its heart? Might be a minute stage further really immersing there into that. So this is more than seeing an image and seeing what it does in imaginal meditation. And it's also more than just an image's sense of me. So there's a lot of possibilities here. But an image imaginal figure has an ethos and an ethical perspective. Sometimes what happens is we get blinkered or caught or blinded ethically. And sometimes an imaginal figure because values is one of the elements of the imaginal can shine a different light on a situation, an ethical situation, on ourselves, on an interaction, on our difficulties, on our mistakes, on all kinds of things. So again, very, very brief sketch of another kind of practice, but I think very, very certainly soul making potentially, but also helpful in all kinds of ways. One of the ways I'm thinking about is with regard to shame. Because there might be either in a situation or after a situation we feel inadequate or our shame, our habitual sense of shame locks in. So doing this kind of practice, excuse me again, either now, live or in memory can really open things up and actually begin to separate out what we might call a shallow kind of shame. There's nothing but dukkha there. It's not necessary. It's not serving any function other than creating dukkha and a binding for ourself. I don't like this word ego, but I really don't like it. Ego, shallow shame. Separating that out from what we might call a kind of soul shame or soul level shame, which may be more authentic, may have more necessity, maybe will be more fruitful. Was there a talk I think I gave on the path of the imaginal retreat? I think it was called something like the love and the demands of the imaginal or something like that. But deliberately in the title putting this kind of what can seem like they don't go together, the love and the demands of the imaginal. Opening up that whole notion of duty to image, duty to soul. So there's so much here that's potentially important, potentially healing, healing at different levels. Just in terms of dissolving or blowing away the kind of shallow shame. But also opening up to maybe a level of shame that is actually in itself healing. Something we don't tend to think of. A healthy shame, a healing shame that connects us more with our soul power. And soulfulness and sense of duty and meaningfulness and redeem something, reconnects again, recontextualizes something or contextualizes it. So I think a lot of possibilities here. Let's linger again. Let's not go too fast. I do want to talk about dimensionality, I just want to linger a little bit on this whole question of shame and guilt. So just very loosely I would say shame has to do with, at least the way I would define it, a negative view of how I am. I am bad or I am worthless or whatever it is. It's a painful belief, a binding belief about how I am. Guilt is a view or views about what I did or what I neglected to do. It's quite possible, of course, there's a connection here, because it's quite possible that if I'm not careful with a guilt I feel in relation to what I did and didn't do, that I felt I should or shouldn't have done, shouldn't or should have done. It's possible that that guilt starts kind of congealing, mortifying, congealing and kind of, actually like a kind of rig of mortise into a sense of shame. It becomes something more pervasive, a conclusion I then carry around, walk around in about who I am. It's quite possible that the guilt, if we're not careful with it, can lead to a more pervasive and long lasting shame about who I am. Of course it's also possible the other way around. To the degree that I have a shame and I carry around or I walk around in a shame about who I am, it's more likely that I will perceive situations and conclude without much thought at all that I am guilty of doing this wrong or neglecting to do that, which would have been better. So these are loaded subjects in our culture, shame and guilt. And a lot of us inherit, of course, part of our inheritance around ethics and morals is quite a painful relationship with these ideas of shame and guilt. So it's becoming, some would say, through certain Christian teachings or interpretations of different Christian teachings of original sin or whatever it is. Of course that's not the case with all people, it doesn't have to be the case for Christian teachings, but I think a lot of people do feel that way. And so the whole area of shame and guilt is something one just can't go near, those terms or those experiences as human beings in any way that's helpful at all, other than trying to dissolve them or dismiss them. And then a lot of people come to Buddhadharma because it seems that Buddhadharma doesn't talk in terms of original sin and guilt and that sort of thing. And indeed a lot of the way it is taught now in the West is very free of such terms and such even suggestions as shame and guilt and all that. But the Buddha did in fact talk about these kinds of things and he talked about Hiri and Ottapa, two-party words, Hiri, H-I-R-I and Ottapa, O-T-T-A-P-A. And he called them the guardians of the world. Hiri and Ottapa, the guardians of the world, he said, when these qualities wane, Hiri and Ottapa wane, human society moves towards the animal realm. Humans become more like animals and the human society becomes more like the animal realm. What's he talking about? Hiri is something we could say more, I don't know if it's entirely directed is the right word, but it's really the innate sense of shame over a moral transgression. So we really feel a shame for doing something wrong. And it's connected with our own self-respect. It's related to a sense of our personal sort of honor. And this is in the Iti-Wutaka for those of you who are interested among other places, I think. And then Ottapa is kind of more slightly more externally oriented. I don't think that's such a satisfying division. But anyway, it's the kind of moral dread sometimes it's translated as or fear of the results of moral wrongdoing. So here is this innate sense of shame over a moral transgression. Ottapa is a moral dread or fear of the results of wrongdoing, which includes fear of the blame and punishment by others so that one's actually that's included. And the Buddha says these are really important qualities. We need to be afraid of being blamed and punished by others in our community, in our society. It's also fear of the karmic consequences of wrongdoing. And it's a fear that by wrongdoing I will scuffle up my chances of attaining Nibbana. Buddhaghosa gives an analogy. So it's like having an iron rod and Hiri is the shit that is smeared on one end of the rod. So you wouldn't want to pick up the rod there. But Ottapa is as if the other end of the rod has been placed in a fire and it's red hot and you wouldn't want to pick up the rod there. So there'd be Hiri, there'd be a kind of disgust, shame or disgust to pick up the rod at the end with the shit on it. And there's the Ottapa, the kind of fear of picking up at the burning end, the red hot end and completely burning your hand there. So shame or disgust and moral dread or fear of the results of moral wrongdoing. And the Buddha says whatever evil arises, whatever evil arises, it springs from a lack of Hiri and Ottapa. And then he also says all virtuous deeds spring from the sense of Hiri and Ottapa. I find a little problematic and limiting because it leaves again no room for Eros. All virtuous deeds spring from a sense of shame or a sense of fear. Where's the room for Eros there? So interesting. But anyway, these are there in Buddha's teachings and you can hear just how much the Buddha emphasised them and how strong he was in his articulation of their importance. But it's interesting also, you know, because nowadays in postmodern society, we postmodern understanding, let's say, or inquiry, we put a lot of emphasis on the, you know, recognising whether something is socially or communally constructed and contingent. And it sounds to a large degree like some of what the Buddha's talking about in the hearing in Ottapa is. So that's a whole other question, whether that's necessarily bad or debars it or what it means for its reality status, etc. I'm not going to go into that now. But going back to the Silan Sol talks, you know, we talked about following Hartman, the idea that there is a place, and there should be a place for healthy shame and healthy guilt, Hartman mostly talks about healthy guilt. And I wonder too whether there's a way of redeeming this whole area in terms of our ethical practice and our ethical sensibility and our approach to ethics. You know, after the Nuremberg trials, trying Nazi war criminals, they were named and shamed and then executed, in fact, but some of them. But they were named and shamed. Nowadays, there's this sort of teaching that don't name and shame, but they were named and shamed. And it, you know, it may have to do with just what is deemed in the society at the time as outrageous enough to warrant naming and shaming. So there's, you know, maybe a place, and there is a place as I've written about and talked about, there is a place for certainly ending or dissolving feelings of guilt, thinking more about actions and the conditions that gave rise to actions rather than persons, etc. There is the importance of that. But maybe there's also the place for taking responsibility for a healthy sense of guilt, etc. So I was reading, I actually wasn't reading, I saw a couple of headlines in the newspaper recently about, I think it was just in Dutch culture in Holland that it's becoming, I think it was in Holland, that flight shaming is becoming more and more okay, that it's more and more okay to suggest to someone that they're flying too much and unnecessarily and the ethical cost of that. Well, why should that not be okay? Or shaming someone for driving SUVs, now SUVs use so much more petrol. Now they used to be mostly diesel, I think. Now they're petrol cars, but they're not diesel, in other words, but they use so much more, and they emit so much more carbon, and they're the fastest growing strand or whatever stream of the automotive industry, so much so that the automotive industry is not at all reducing its overall emissions, is actually increasing them because of the increasing amounts of SUVs sold. I don't know. Well, maybe there's a place for shaming. Maybe it's a necessary thing. Maybe, I don't know. But in terms of flight shaming, I didn't read the articles, but I do remember, you know, I was first teaching around different groups of senior teachers, and sometimes I would hear them talking about just, you know, because they were flying all over to teach retreats and about their sort of, what's it called, frequent flyer status. And sometimes where people can talk about this almost just sounds like almost a subtle boasting in there, or identification with being important because one flies a lot. And maybe, you know, the culture will, and society will hopefully not, in not too long a time, evolve to a point where that kind of subtle boasting or identification as being important will be, you know, about as okay as kind of subtly boasting how many slaves one owns. I mean, it's easy to, I've talked about this, I'm not going to go into this just like it's easy, but I'm, you know, I'm flying for the Dharma. It's because I'm teaching Dharma, it's less suffering, I'm contributing to less suffering, like the slave owner would say, well, I'm helping the economy, aren't I? Sometimes this whole idea of what it's okay to shame and what it isn't is really, again, socially deemed based on where the, where the kind of, you know, average or lowest bar of ethical views of right and wrong have reached inner society at any time. Anyway, it might be that certainly with regard to the ideation, imagine, imagine ideas of values and virtues, there can be, as Hartman said, there can be a sense of guilt. And he said, we went into the concealer and so there needs to be a sense of guilt, there needs to be place for that. And something that's inevitable in ethical life and practice. So maybe that, I don't know, also with regard to imaginal figures, it may be, you know, reverence is one of the elements of the imaginal. I was trying to find the right term, remember looking up the word reverence and it's related, I think, to, from the Latin, to the capacity to, to, to feel fear and awe in relationship to something. Maybe this is also, you know, there's a place for wrapped up in the reverence, there's a place for something like hiri and otapa in relation, whether it's imaginal ideas, we're talking about values and virtues or an imaginal figure. And how we are or are not refracting that figure. Well, there's a possible shame or guilt, a hiri, otapa for not trying to approach something, a situation, a choice, an ethical choice and not having tried to approach it with sensing the soul. And then feeling a hiri or otapa, some kind of shame or guilt for that, but a healthy one. One that takes us forward, decide to aspire to do something differently in the following situation comes or the next situation comes. Remember all this when we're talking about soul making the imaginal, all this is in the context of the benevolence of an image, love and loving. Love and sorry, love and being loved, being loved, that's an element of the imaginal. And I would say also, when you really get into the practice of the ideational imaginal, the ideas also can love you. They will love you, they do love you. So the ideational imaginal, there's a sense of the benevolence. We are in relationship with beings, figures, imaginal ideas that love us and place demands on us. Love and demands of the imaginal, love and demands of imaginal ideas. And that word benevolence, again from Latin, benevolence, volus, relate to our wills, wanting bene, good, what's good, want, they want what's good for us. They want, there's a beneficent, they want what's good for us, benevolence, that's what it actually means. Someone asked me a little while ago, what do I mean by this element dimensionality shading into divinity? And partly in trying to sort of open it out a bit more with words. Well, it's pointing to a sense of benevolent mystery. So when I have a sense of an image having this dimensionality shading into divinity, I partly mean there's a sense of benevolent mystery there. Mystery, but also it's benevolent. And one sense of that, even if it's only subtly and vaguely. Dimensionality is to me related to the word depth, and depth, and one way of understanding what the word depth means is something's deep if it's not immediately apparent or immediately obvious. So that's the mystery, there's a benevolent mystery that's part of what mystery means. Depth, not immediately obvious. Something is not immediately obvious, it's also, it's kind of hidden from immediate, immediate obvious view. But the hiddenness there that's part of this dimensionality shading into divinity is not menacing. It's not like something I can't make out and it's kind of sinister or menacing, or the fact that I can't sense what it is clearly is kind of ominous in some way. So that's, this benevolence is very much part of what we mean by dimensionality shading into divinity. It also means as related to having soft and elastic edges, which is another of the elements. The dimensionality and the divinity is not sharply defined, clearly delineated. So dimensionality, I said that's what I wanted to begin talking about today. And I said in the last talk, you know, ethics needs, it needs something, in order to ground ethics, in order to make sense of ethics, in order to evaluate between different ethical choices, in order for the whole thing to kind of really function with any power in our lives and any vitality in our lives. Something needs to be sensed or granted as having a higher or deeper dimension or order or level. And in that higher, deeper dimensional order, that's kind of naturally where, because of this, a deeper dimension, higher dimension, naturally, meaningfulness, value, purpose, sanctity, in the broadest range of that term, they naturally reside there. And without that, without a sense of giving, granting or sensing dimensionality in something, ethics cannot really work. It really doesn't work very well. So I think I said, I can't remember where it was, but, you know, scientistic, scientific materialism, in other words, a kind of way of thinking and enterprise that wants to, tries to explain everything, all phenomena and all experience and the whole of the cosmos, inner and outer, explain it through a reduction to just purely, let's say, material, small material elements. That's a scientistic, that means that they're trying to explain everything that way, and the materialism, scientific materialism is reductions into little bits and bobs of billiard balls. Scientific materialism as a kind of approach to, or enterprise to explain the whole of existence and all our experience, it implies that there isn't a reality to values. There's not a, you know, there's no possibility of grounding values in anything real. And actually, as I explained, whenever it was, whichever talk or series it was, it actually becomes very hard in that, in such an enterprise of scientistic, scientific materialism to even, even to try and justify why we should try and reduce suffering in the world. Because suffering itself is also, scientistically and materialistically reduces just the movement of particles in the universe. It's just, what's suffering? Well, it's really a material thing, it's some neurological impulses. That's really what suffering is, because that's really what everything is. And neurological impulses are, can be reduced to neurotransmitters and molecules across neurological synapses, all of which down to molecules, down to subatomic particles. And really, suffering is just a shifting, a moving around of particles in the universe. It has no more or less worth than anything else. So even the trying to justify why we should reduce suffering and trying to make that as a basis of ethics can have no grounding. If there's no dimensionality, everything's equal. It's just mattering this way, everything. Also, the scientific method rules out, obviously used to for a long time, it rules out human feeling regarding anything. Remember, we try in the scientific method, put my feelings, my affects, my desires and wishes, put that all aside. That's second class citizen. It's a distorting thing. So I put that aside. So my feelings about anything, including my feelings about values and what's valuable and what's deeply valuable. Scientific method sidelines it. Or scientific method studies feelings and may even measure them more recently these days. But it still can offer no real grounding or basis for them. So I might, as a psychologist, some other kind of psychologist, decide to study human feelings and maybe measure them, whether that's in brainwave activity or from questionnaires or whatever it is. But I still can give no real grounding or basis for them. So scientific materialism becomes impossible from that basis to root any ontology of ethics. There's nothing real to give any rooting for ethics or any, there's no recourse to something of value to explain why we should do this and why we shouldn't do that ethically. I should point out just while we're on this subject about reductionism and dimensionality. So a kind of scientific reductionism that's kind of, as a reductionism down to, for example, billiard ball-like particles, everything goes down to that or whatever goes down to that, is a kind of reduction merely to smaller units of the same kind of stuff. And so it's a flattening reductionism. And certainly if I start with something that feels rich, like my sense of value, and I reduce it down to billiard ball-like particles, it's taking something that was dimensional and rich, etc., and reducing it to something that's very flat to flattening reductionism. If I'm just talking about matter and I reduce matter, this table, and I reduce the table down to billiard ball-like particles and my theory of it, then that's also a flattening reductionism. Or rather, it's a reductionism that doesn't introduce another dimension. It's a kind of flat. If, however, my scientific reduction goes down past such basic particles, down to the sort of quantum mathematical probability functions I've talked about, which exist as these sort of complex mathematical functions related to probability, but they exist, these equations or functions or geometries, they exist in a kind of multi-dimensional abstract mathematical space. So I've gone past electrons. What's an electron? Well, actually an electron is this. We can't point to a particle or a wave, or all we can point to is this kind of abstract multi-dimensional mathematical, I'm talking about mathematically multi-dimensional space, entity. It's not even matter anymore. We've reduced to something then of a different kind, a different order. Then we have given a kind of dimensionality. It's not a flattening, but we've actually dimensionalized matter. We've gone from something that it seems obvious, even if it's just small bits of solidity, it's gone to something that we can't even really say it's the same kind or order of stuff. There's a different dimension there. So it's also a reduction, but it's got a dimensionalizing in it. Still, that second kind of reduction that is dimensionalizing, say it's going down to these very abstract, you say what's really real, not the table, not even the electron or the proton, what's really real is these abstract, very complex, very sophisticated mathematical entities, mathematical functions, equations that exist in a strange abstract mathematically multi-dimensional space. That's what's real. It gives a kind of dimensionalizing, but it would still be problematic if that view attempts to explain, put that in quotes, things like human love and sense of meaning through that reduction. In other words, again, if it's scientistic, if it attempts a reduction of the totality of existence, of being, etc. Still not flattening, but it would be very problematic. It's not capable of doing so, it's not capable of making sense that way. Okay, so dimensionality is what, I'm going to start looking at dimensionality, just touching it already briefly. It's a complicated subject and difficult to even find the right language to talk about it, but one way that a sense of dimensionality has historically kind of been ripped out of a question of our exploration of ethics is we can trace it historically in one way and one of its roots actually came from the Protestant Reformation. One way that came from that seed, from that revolution really, ended up impoverishing the kinds of dimensionality that human beings could feel and conceive of and sense in existence in relation to all kinds of things and also in time in relation to ethics. It came through the Protestant Reformation partly because one of the main things the Protestant Reformation set out to do was to abolish and reject any kind of mediation between human being and God. So this was one of its central sort of attempts and thrusts and insistencies to reject anything that was intermediate between human being and God. So no priests, no priests with any kind of higher function or who've served as intermediaries in any way, no sacraments either, no this holy ritual or this holy or made holy object, this sanctified object, whatever it is, can mediate, is necessary to mediate between a human being and God. There was this attempt at completely getting rid of any intermediaries, priests, sacraments etc. and what that brought with it was also a kind of affirmation or elevation or emphasis on ordinary life. It wasn't just the life in the church, it wasn't just the Eucharist, so it wasn't just the life in the church, it was certainly not the Eucharist or the Mass or the priest who was needed as an intermediary. They also, not quite the same point, but they also kind of rejected monasticism, monks and nuns for a slightly different reason, probably connected but one reason they was given was just basically there's nothing between you and God and it's totally up to you and God, that relationship. And all of us need to have total commitment, there's no such thing as person having more or less commitment, you either have a full commitment or you're damned. And a monastic being regarded as someone who's decided, yes I do want to give everything to God, I do want to focus wholeheartedly on that, that is the highest thing and my commitment is total. In the Protestant Reformation the view was that's just not a healthy notion because all of us need to have a total commitment, so no monastics. But in a way that's silly isn't it, it doesn't really bear out just looking around us as humans. Clearly there are people with very different levels of motivation and commitment, even if we just talk about to their music or art or poetry or whatever it is, or whatever. And we see it definitely as well in the world of Dharma and practice as people with very different motivations and also different levels of talent, you know. So there's something a little bit silly with that, but anyway that's a side point. There's this principle thing I want to focus on now, it's this rejection of mediation, rejection of priests of sacraments but also a rejection of angels as intermediaries. So all this came with the Protestant Reformation, rejection of angels and saints and the Virgin Mary and the thing that was an intermediary or could be seen or regarded as an intermediary between the human being and God. There's a rejection of angels and including therefore the role of angels as reflecting and refracting at different levels the totally inconceivable nature or being of God. So we reject intermediaries and angels get rejected and their role of reflecting and refracting at different levels, this totally inconceivable nature of God, that gets rejected as well. Also as rejected as angels as beings, the human can in turn refract and mirror, that we can, as we talk about refracting the angel, reflecting, refracting the demon, mirroring in our life the image. So that gets rejected, thrown out as well. So rejecting angels as beings, the human can, rejecting angels as beings that reflect and refract at different levels, you know, the totally inconceivable nature of God, the transcendent, almost unknowable being in itself of God. And also rejection of angels as beings that the human can in turn refract, reflect, mirror and be called by. And in being called by, come into more intimate relationship with and sense of the attributes of the divine. And in refracting and mirroring the angels, express and manifest in human life the attributes of the divine. So all this has to do with a kind of hierarchy of being, hierarchy of cosmic being, God, hierarchy of angels, human being, etc. Nature. So, I've touched on it before, that these platonic ideas and forms are sometimes called, and they came to be regarded as the attributes of God. And we can think of them as, I think it was a seal in soul talks, that ideational, imaginal, they're related to these platonic notions of ideas and forms and images. Attributes of God and angels. So ideas, forms, ideational, imaginal and images all can be seen in regard as the attributes of God and angels, the same thing. So there's a dimensionality here that was scrapped, was done away with, was outlawed in fact. A hierarchy of intermediaries and that whole dimensionality that opened up with that. That was very much related to what was ultimately good. That pointed and drew us towards what was good, that enabled us to refract and be drawn towards what was virtuous, etc. Embodied virtue, connected virtue with the divine. And that ultimate dimensionality that way, connected virtue with holiness, with that whole scale. When we talk about images in soul making Dharma and we talk about the ideational, imaginal or ideational images, we can say that they are a dimension, as angels are in this old sense pre-reformation. They are a dimension and we feel that we're refracting, reflecting something of a different level. We can also say, and we do say, they have dimensionality. So experientially it's as if the sense of an image is as if in itself it has a dimensionality shading into divinity. So they are a dimension. Their very existence tells us of a dimensionality. But they have in themselves, so to speak, or in our sense of them, their being has a kind of dimensionality shading into divinity. So they are and they have dimensionality. In soul making Dharma, again, this dimensionality, it's a connection. And this whole order of angels and angels and intermediaries is really something that connects. It's sometimes called a chain of being, although that phrase became mixed up and two very different ideas got mixed up in what that meant. But it connects with one thread, these different levels of being, different dimensions. So that if I pray to the angels in a supplicatory way, if I ask for help from the angels, sometimes I do, sometimes I have a sense of the soul making angels, the angels of soul making and being so ill and so unwell. Sometimes trying to give talks or whatever it is and feeling in myself, not able to. I will pray to the angels, my sense of the soul making angels, the image, the imaginal sense of soul making Dharma angels. And in my sense of that, of these angels so called, the supplication to them, they are not me, but they're also not not me. They are not me, but they're not other than me. Or they are other, but there is this direct line from my being, from them to my being, that somehow includes my being. Or to say it another way, I participate in the angels and they participate in me. I participate in an image. And this imaginal figure participates in me. So historically, one of the things that happened, as I said, in the Protestant Reformation, one of the seeds there ended up having quite a devastating effect on, well in all kinds of ways, and a lot of really good things obviously as well. But quite a devastating effect on how we relate to how legitimate we feel is the world of angels and any sense of intermediaries with divinity or a sense of dimensionality in all kinds of ways in our existence. We inherit that partly as also imaginal practitioners. We inherit the history of Western theology in fact, and Western philosophy. We can't help bumping into or being buffeted by or constrained by the different elements of that history of Western thought. But again, what happens when we don't have dimensionality is that it affects our sense of ethics. So there is an illustration of one way affects the sense of the imaginal, but also our sense of angels again as reflecting, as refracting the virtues, which is being the ideas, the forms, which are the divine attributes of a God, of a divinity, whose nature is actually completely transcendent and unspeakable and beyond any attributes. But what happens when we rule out dimensionality is we actually limit what we can do with ethics. So I think human rights, which is something we've become so used to as a notion now, think it was the roots of that notion are in Hobbes and Grotius, I think, and some others. So the notion of civil rights, I mean, in civic rights, whatever, and the roots of that are in Hobbes and Grotius, but it's not because a human being or actually these kinds of human beings or this portion of human beings, see how fractional it was, partial it was, it wasn't that a human being has these rights because, for example, they're made in the divine image, which would be calling on the divinity as, and the fact of human beings being made in the divine image to give a kind of dimensionality to justify the sanctity and the careful treating of human beings because they're made in the divine image. You understand? So when we say why should human beings have rights because they're made in the divine image, it's giving a dimension as an explanation, as a grounding. So but the original movement and development of the idea of rights in society wasn't coming from the idea of divine image or that kind of grounding. It was coming in post reformation as a kind of people were trying to figure out a basis for law. So it wasn't even a question of morality and virtue, really, it was trying to ensure stable society, stable societies. And it was devised, it came up as an idea, you know, in the times of the post reformation wars, you know, enormous bloodshed and brutality in Europe at that time, and also the civil war in England. Likewise, very bloody and traumatic. So how can we have a sort of basis for law? What we start people start to think, thinking away from kind of purely theological and soul questions and dimensions to ground ethics to more legal ways of thinking about and contractual. What's the social contract? These are all ideas that were born then post reformation in attempts at a purely secular moral philosophy. In other words, one that wasn't grounded or was only very little grounded in recourse to the dimensionality of divinity. Just as a complete aside, I don't know if I've mentioned this in another talk, I was reading a book called, I think it's called Epistemologies of the South. It's a collection of kind of academic essays by sort of post-colonial or anti-colonial thinkers. And one of them was pointing out that the whole notion of human rights was a colonial notion and a Western notion, and they were rejecting it. It's a very surprising thing to read because we're so used to think, I'm so used to thinking of that as a kind of, this is, you know, really basic and important universal notion. Everyone could sign up to this and this person was saying, no, that's some, you know, something created by colonial white guys. Anyway, that's an aside. So when there's no dimensionality, then we very easily, it's very easy for ethics to slide into what really becomes just law or this kind of trying to figure out, okay, what are people's rights? And then you get this argument between rights, which is very hard to adjudicate. But it's partly because there's the withdrawing or the ruling out of any other dimensionality and it has consequences. So something needs to be sensed, sensed or sensed as or granted a higher dimensionality, a deeper dimensionality. It needs to be felt to be of a different level of order. And in that other level, somehow naturally reside meaningfulness value, purpose, sanctity, etc. And without that, we run into a lot of problems in our approach to ethics. You know, trying to figure out ethical philosophies or practices. Something or other needs to be sensed or granted as being of a higher, deeper dimensionality level or whatever we're going to call it. And what happens, partly something I read in Charles Taylor recently, he uses very different language and is coming at the thing from a slightly different angle. But when in language we're using, when there's no dimensionality or when the dimensionality is kind of hidden or unconscious, or we could also say in language I've used in the past, when the soul preferences. Because what I give dimensionality to you has also to do with what I, where my sense of soul making is. But when the dimensionality or my soul preferences are hidden or unconscious, it brings certain consequences to the philosophy. So we talked about, you know, I talked about in other talks in the past, you know, what happens or other, am I choosing a Dharma? Am I choosing a notion of awakening and goal and all that? Am I choosing a Dharma based on really what my soul is desiring as a way of feeling myself and the cosmos? What kind of cosmos do I want to live in? What's my fantasy of self and cosmos? And then building the Dharma around there. And that not being admitted, that actually I want to see the cosmos this way and I want to see myself in relation to the cosmos this way. And that's why I'm choosing this kind of version of the Dharma. So when a dimensionality is refused or it's hidden or unconscious, what you get is a kind of, Charles Taylor says in his words, parasitic philosophies. And I'm not sure where he says this for all or at least some of what he calls enlightenment derived modern positions. I don't think it's all of them, but I'm not sure if he actually says that. They're parasitic in that they're actually relying on some already established moral assumptions about right or wrong, about what should be done or not done. But they're refusing to give a why. They're refusing in other words to give a dimensionality. There's no grounding in anything else. So they're parasitic on older philosophies that already older notions, older currents in the society that already established these assumptions around ethics. And they just take the same assumptions. They don't change them at all. They just piggyback on them, but they withdraw the why. And they actually don't need to provide a why because there's a current of all of people already established in those views of those moral assumptions about right or wrong. But also, this is Charles Taylor pointing out, they provide no positive view or no constructive practice. And I would want to agree with this and actually elaborate. There's no positive view or positive framework of philosophy or practice, whether it's personal or let's say governmental. You can tell when a philosophy is or even a Dharma or approach is parasitic in that way because it's characterized by mostly its polemic attack on other positions. Mostly what you hear, very little positive in the sense of constructing views, constructing practices, constructing philosophies, etc. Coherent frameworks. Mostly what you would hear and read is polemic attack on some other view. Or if something is constructed, it's very thin soup. Very thin soup. I was giving you an example in some of those online seminars about trying to construct Buddhist aesthetics just around the Buddhist notion of impermanence. And then art always has to point to impermanence, whatever kind of art. And it's terribly thin as an idea or as a framework. It's very, very thin. Without something being given this granted or sensed with a deeper dimension, a higher dimension of order level. Actually it's impossible. It's impossible to ground ethics, impossible to make sense of it. It's impossible to construct and give a why we should do this and not that. So talking in the scene of Soul talks about Richard Rorty and how if you read his writings carefully, he will say we cannot ground it. He actually refuses. There's no such thing as another dimension. There's no higher grounding. You cannot ground ethics in anything else, etc. But then he just slips out in the language that he uses that he's using notions of what's good or bad or etc. But he has no way of explaining or justifying why that is. Because there's no other grounding. And I don't know exactly who Charles Taylor meant, but I have a... Somehow in reading I got a sense that he was referring to, I think they're called the New Atheists. Is there a New Atheism movement, I think, I'm not sure. In terms of just... There's nothing there except polemic attack on other positions. And actually in terms of what's being offered as coherent construction of frameworks, conceptual frameworks, what's being offered in terms of practice, there's either nothing there at all or very, very, very thin soup. There's no way forward offered really. Again, with the soul-making dharma, there's both... We've tried to really create and discover a coherent conceptual framework that has depth and range, possibility and elasticity, but also practice. So conceptual framework and practice. And when we talk about ways of looking, practice, practice. Not just the idea of ways of looking, it's the practice. As we said, so many of these modern philosophers completely lack any practice. They might talk like Richard Rorty does about open to different ways of looking. He doesn't use that phrase, different views, keep the conversation going. But they have no way, as I've said this before, no way of actually practicing different ways of looking. So it's all just kind of empty rhetoric. And again, you find there's actually very little offered. So Richard Rorty, and I think I've probably said this again, says, okay, so he's deconstructed this and that, and it's very good, excellent deconstruction of things to a certain extent. And he says, what we really need to do is keep the conversation going, keep the conversation going. And that's his ethical standpoint, keep the conversation going, one of his main ethical standpoints. But there is no conversation. There's just nothing to discuss. There's nothing offered. I can't take on other viewpoints to really engage in a conversation, and I'm not really offering anything of myself. Because I have no framework, because I have no dimensionality. All this is connected. So when we look back historically, I'm not a historian, but when we look back historically, you can kind of see, I'm not sure it's the right word, we can kind of see different attempts or maybe different ways, and it's a better word, different ways in which ethics has been provided with a dimensionality or different attempts at providing ethics with dimensionality. So dimensionality would make sense of things, offer reasons for why, orient, help to adjudicate, give justification, etc. So I just want to briefly mention them now, and then soon enough for today. So we'll come back to this hopefully in the next talk. But very briefly, to run through, we could separate them out into four, looking historically, but again, these are not separate, actually, nor are they simple. I'm not presenting them in a chronological order, nor, in fact, are they really even chronologically divided, it's more like they overlap and you get different versions of this one, different variations sort of arising on different timelines, and there's modifications and all kinds of stuff. And they even, you get combinations as well. But just very briefly, not to mention them. So four kind of ways or attempts at providing dimensionality or something that dimensionalizes and provides dimension for ethics. Another level, we're going to recourse to another level order dimension. One is what we might call rationality. And so this goes back to, say Plato, maybe Pythagoras really, but, and who knows where before that, but let's call it rationality. But the thing I want to say right now is that that's not a simple word. Okay, so a grounding of ethics in rationality, because if you take four philosophers, Plato, Locke, Kant and Hegel, that word meant very different things. So for each of them, it was central into central in their way of thinking about ethics. Plato, Locke, Kant and Hegel. Rationality was central, but it meant something very, very different. Or at least there's two main sort of ways it was thought about. At least lots of others as well, even within those four, or some others within those four. But two main ways, in those ways, the main different meanings of the word rationality were connected with the second way of giving dimensionality to ethics or providing a dimension which would give make sense of ethics and help us orient. And that is cosmic order, the order of the cosmos. So one old way of the ancient way, and actually I'm not ancient, up to the Middle Ages certainly, one way of conceiving but also sensing the cosmos, the world we live in and the whole cosmos was that it had hierarchical, a kind of vertical order, of which that hierarchy of angels, I briefly alluded to earlier, that would be part of it. And there's a kind of hierarchical vertical order, you know, from the sort of ultimate levels of the Godhead, so to speak, the mystery of the divine, all the way down, so to speak, down to the barest matter or whatever. So we can talk about things being closer to the divine or further away from the divine, complex, loads of different variations. That's one way of thinking about the cosmic order. Another way of thinking about cosmic order, which came later, was as a much more horizontal structure. It's more like the co-functioning of parts. This is something like the way an ecosystem works, or a machine works, actually, or a clock works as these different parts, and they're all kind of at the same level and they function together the way they move together, the way they perhaps feel of each other or whatever, functions. It's a kind of more horizontal, let's say, order. So we can have two ways of thinking about cosmic order, and in relationship to those two ways, two ways of using either notion of order to ground a sense of dimensionality of ethics. I'm going to come back to this in a lot of detail, I'm just mentioning it now. Going back to the rationality as a kind of attempt at dimensionalizing ethics, giving a dimension to support ethics. That mentality meant to Plato, meant more like seeing and sensing and knowing, uncovering that vertical cosmic order, and putting one's life in relationship to that, what is it, I should say, like, orienting one's life toward that order, and toward the hierarchy in that order. So one is, it's clear what is the highest good, and it's clear the kind of scale or stairway that leads to it. And to be rational means to uncover that, to see it, to sense it, and to live one's, to think and to live one's life in accordance with what it naturally kind of suggests and demands. That's what it means for Plato to be rational. For someone like Locke it meant something very different, it means something more akin to what we mean by it these days, it means just being something like logical. Hegel's slightly different, Kant also different, we will maybe go into this, well we will go into it more. So different kinds of rationality, different kinds of cosmic order, and what they suggest about ethics and how they work in different ways to give a kind of support and dimensionalizing and sense making to ethics. A third way of giving dimensionality ethics is what we could call, what has been sometimes called volunteerism, which is just basically saying, well, this is ethical because God said so, because God said it in the Bible, or in the Bible it says that God said so. And so there's a dimensionality there because God is by definition a being of a different order, of a different dimension, of a different level, and if God said so then it's God's will, God's voluntary, God has completely free will in this view. And so all that is in the pure view, all that is grounding ethics is just because God said so, has nothing to do with the structure of the universe, has nothing to do with human rationality, or our logic being able to discover what the most ethical thing is, it's just God said so. And so God said so, God said so, and a fourth is basically suffering, or turn it around and say happiness, and the kind of attempt to calculate or estimate really how much suffering this or that action would cause in comparison with this or with another action. How much happiness and try and ground ethics in really in a notion of suffering and happiness. So do you see how each can kind of makes its appeal or had its appeal as a dimension by what I mean by a dimension? There is an appeal in each of these to something kind of intrinsically sacred, meaningful, good, valuable, true, higher, actually not the last one. I'm including it right now, but not the last one. It's not really a dimension that's part of its problem. This utilitarianism, just thinking of what suffering is the most important thing, reducing sufferings most important thing, increasing happiness is the most important thing. We'll come back to this, I hope. But at least the other three, and in some way, this fourth one, reducing suffering, increasing happiness, tries to kind of mask itself as if it were another dimension. So each of them has an appeal to something intrinsically sacred or good, ultimately valuable, meaningful, true, higher in some way. And that implies or gives a why and a basis for ethics, whether it's an ethics of wrong or right or an ethics of what is good to love, good to be. But each of these rationality, cosmic order, voluntarism, reduction of suffering, increase of happiness, each of these four has problems ran into ways that it failed in the history of our, well, there are places where it fails, let's put it that way. Some would say they have failed historically or philosophically or whatever. But each of these brings problems, has problems. There's places where it's easy to find where it just it doesn't function or no longer functions where something becomes impossible. Let's see how we do for time. I think I'll stop there for today, and we'll go into this. I just want to mention these, these are the kinds of things that have been attempted as ways of providing a dimensionality or assumed to provide a dimensionality to ethics. I mean, for, you know, an example of a problem or a failure or impossibility was just that that notion of cosmic order after the Protestant Reformation and then even more so with the scientific revolution, that that idea of hierarchical order and an order of angels, it was either theologically brought into question and then more and more kind of, it became more and more impossible to take it seriously as a reality as the scientific revolution group. So that would be an example of the crumbling and the disappearing of that as a possible dimensionalizing or giving dimension to ethics. But I want to return to that as a possibility, in fact, in a different way. But as in each of them, we could go through each of them brings brings brings different problems. But let's let's stop there for today.

 Tonight I'd like to start talking about ethics, and in a way really pick up some of what I was speaking about in the Silla and Soul series, I think it's nine or ten parts there, so some of what was gone into and explored there. I'd like to elaborate certain elements of that, pieces of that, and extend what we said there. So these talks on ethics are very much based on those Silla and Soul talks, they're presuming them, and they, as I said, elaborate on certain strands there and extend it, and I hope take it just a little bit further at least. Ethics, as I said, is one of those subjects that's infinite that I don't think we should ever finally arrive at at a full stop and answer where we're completely satisfied. So whatever I say in these talks is really just a snapshot of this time in my own studies and reflections regarding ethics, and particularly regarding their connection with soul-making, Dharma practice. So it's just a snapshot now of what could be and what should be, I think, a never-ending exploration. I'm doing it now partly because I'm concerned that won't be another chance. I hope, obviously I hope there will, but I hope if not or even if there is for me that others will explore this whole area and these themes further more deeply, more widely than I have done and develop the soul-making Dharma and in lots of ways but also in relation to ethics and the ethical aspects of directions within soul-making Dharma, and that others would also study other ethical philosophies and perhaps there can be fruitful dialogue in the wider sense at some point. So pretty much everything I say here rests on an understanding and a digestion of what I said in Seeler and Soul, what we said in Seeler and Soul elaborates and extends that I won't repeat the explanations and the vocabulary that I introduced in those talks in Seeler and Soul very very minimally. So I'm assuming that you're up to speed with that. And why now? Yeah, well because it seems obvious to me that there's an urgent need in our world at present right now at this time to rethink and reformulate ethics, to put it on a firmer foundation, foundations to make it more coherent, to make it more central to our lives and also to make it something, to allow it to be something beautiful, something attractive, this whole domain, this whole area of exploration. There's an urgent urgent need for that and yeah I might say you know valuable and important as offering mindfulness to the world and to different demographics in society and the wider world are valuable and important as that is of course I would say an even more pressing need, an even more urgent and more basic need is to open up and revivify the whole exploration of ethics and offer something there in terms of education, formulation, as I said practice. So that strikes me as a very urgent need. It also strikes me after the Seeler and Soul talks that I was perhaps a little too restrained there, a little too modest if that's the right word with respect to what I think, what I now think soul making Dharma might actually offer in to the area of ethics. So sometimes I think I said that people get very excited about soul making Dharma and I almost find myself taking the other pole of like well you know let's see it's not for everyone and man you know it's great that you're excited and I tend to take the pole of the more sort of unenthusiastic partner there but perhaps in retrospect I was as I said a little too restrained too modest in regarding what soul making Dharma might offer and might inject into the ethical discourse about ethics and how it might open it out and how it might what it might give it and what questions it might bring to bear as well. So in many ways this talk is a kind of as I'll explain it's a questioning about what we need in ethical systems but it's also a kind of proffering or putting forward or advocating of soul making Dharma as possibly a really potent and viable injection into the way we think about and relate to ethics injection into the wider society not just soul making Dharma practitioners. So it's a little more positive as a stance perhaps at least I'm hoping a little less restrained a little less modest and probably be still quite restrained and modest. Anyway so one of the things I think I touched on in the Sino Soul Talks was a very real danger I think that ethics the whole area of ethics slides or has already slid to really become a question of law and legality. So ethics as an area of philosophy kind of has slid or is in the process of sliding to law and laws the debate rather the debate about ethics has almost a debate about laws for the most part law ensuring as best as possible whatever that might mean that everyone's right to pursue what they want to pursue is protected as long as it does not infringe on others similar rights to pursue what they want to pursue in society so that the whole debate and question the whole way we see ethics kind of slides to a question of what laws do we need to put in place or what behavior do we need to ensure that will in turn ensure that as best as possible everyone's right to go after and do what they want to go after and do is protected as long as or to the degree that it doesn't infringe on other similar other people's similar rights to pursue what they want to pursue so that's the kind of ideal that of this kind of thinking this kind of level of thinking about ethics where it's really slid to a level of thinking about law legality and rights and of course this makes sense and it's a good idea and historically it came you know I think Hobbes Thomas Hobbes was one of the people behind it at the time of the English Civil Wars are utter brutality and chaos and violence and bloodshed and so thinking about ethics in this way and you know offering that as a kind of idea was you know a really good idea and makes sense at a certain level but one of the things I want to point out is that it's a limited way of thinking about ethics and it will be limiting not to mention of course the fact that it's not very well implemented in our societies you know the rights of the rich to pursue what they want to pursue seem protected often above the rights of the poor to pursue what they want to pursue even if they're just the rights to basic human needs etc or or you know the rights of one ethnic group over another so it's not very well implemented both in terms of economic status and other you know race and other social social status things but but just as important as that it it has no basis and this is what I want part of a big part of what I want to want to go into there's no basis on underlying that whole ideology there's not a sufficient basis to decide between someone claiming this is my right to pursue this and someone saying oh but that infringes on my right to do that the theory philosophical theory the ethical theory just stops at this kind of unidimensional flat level of rights and law and has no deeper structure or ideation to on on which that level rests and so it becomes without basis it becomes very difficult to actually go into certain thorny ethical difficulties there's nothing there's no nothing's in place to help us there and so ethics slides to a kind of law and underneath that law is a kind of moral nihilism a vacuum a kind of moral vacuum where higher ethical sensibilities in particular higher values and ethical discourse should or could be so the whole thing is a slide to a kind of contest or conflict between so-called rights my right to do this your right to do that and there's no good really good well thought out or deep let's say deep basis for deciding between these conflicting rights or even for there's no basis for approaching the issue ethically any deeper so one of the things i'd like to or one of the ways i'm sort of thinking about these talks is is asking the question to myself and to you what do we need what do we need in an approach to ethics what do we need in an ethical philosophy and using that question of what we need to sort of help direct us and navigate us through and you know a lot of different possible ethical theories and seeing how soul making dharma and soul making ethical dharma might supply us with those needs and and and navigate us through the sort of what has become a kind of a quagmire without signposts so i could say need i could say wishes but one thing first of all generally speaking is it's not or it's not primarily i would say that what we need is we need guidance about what to do or we need guidelines instruction moral laws about what to do or it's not primarily it's not certainly not only that we need that's not maybe not even primarily that we need that so i don't think and for reasons i went into briefly on the cino soul talk i don't think any ethical system utilitarianism counts ethics habirmas this open dialogue idea open communication idea no ethical system is actually able to inform us to actually give us that information of what to do in every situation there will also be moral antinomies as as as explained quite a lot of length in the cino soul talks sometimes a person wants i just want to be i just want to know what to do i just want to know what's right and what's wrong tell me what to do give me give me give me a list and sometimes that uh that need or that felt need to know what to do may just be coming from a kind of ego fear sometimes or as well it can be just a lack of full engagement of the soul with these questions a lack of full engagement that's actually open to the difficulties for example the antinomies between different values so if i feel agitated um regarding some ethical choice or ethical situation can i tell the difference between um let's call it ego for want of a better word a kind of more superficial level of my being and its concerns and its um agitations and an agitation that's more rooted as soul level if you like is a deeper agitation or do i just have an aversion um to any level of agitation any difficulty whether it's an ego level or a soul level so i don't think i don't think generally speaking that's what we actually need now oftentimes that's how we think about ethics so that's how it's come to be kind of amputated as a subject and ethics becomes uh as philosophy it becomes okay let's get a system or a way of thinking about that will tell us what to do and that's how the discourse is shrunk etc rather i think generally what we need is um related more to the question what is worthwhile what is really worthwhile in life what is it as i as i asked that question what uh on the scene of soul talk what is it that makes life beautiful what is it that opens up and supports and gives life to a beautiful life it gives the beauty to a beautiful life what is it that brings a sense of depth and to our existence that makes life worth living that makes a life really worth living that brings some sacredness including a sense of sacredness regarding you know the human being who one is what one is as a human being and sacredness regarding our relationship with others with society and sacredness regarding our relationship with the world the earth with nature with the cosmos because we are human beings in a cosmos we are human beings on earth as well as we are human beings in society so actually i think this is what ethics need very generally speaking first of all ethics um needs that we need to think about it in a broader way we need to approach it looking for something much broader something which has been as i said amputated from the whole exploration philosophical domain of inquiry and the whole conversation it's what matters in that sense about living a life worth living in that direction to a life of beauty this is um i think most generally speaking what what's needed to save ethics to redeem it to re-elevate it and and open it out again into a really flourishing subject an area of exploration that's actually then commensurate with our problems capable of addressing the you know immense problems we have now as a species the immense problems are causing others other species and immense problems we have in society that's actually adequate to that task so very generally speaking we need to move from the question of not only what to do but um what makes life beautiful what makes life really a life that is worth living what is the good to use the ancient terminology that i talked about in in in seer and soul so this is more than just law and it's also more than economy and we think the economy matters because if the economy is okay then uh you know people will be okay because then they'll be able to pursue what they want to pursue so if we take care of the law and the economy and then within that everyone can decide for themselves what they want to do and what they feel is important so we need more than that we absolutely need more than that and i'm not the first person to to recognize this and to say something about it of course but on the other hand i don't think it's possible anymore in uh modern or postmodern society to impose um this or that x or y belief or activity as this is what you must do to ethically to be an ethical person uh it's it's we have the law for that limited area but further than that it's actually no longer possible to impose x or y from the outside this this belief this activity etc so what matters what makes life important um what makes life rather rather deep beautiful meaningful worth living these are the questions that need opening up again i think and as i said that's related to a sense of sacredness um and as i'm going into what what the sacredness of the human being as well as well as sacredness of the earth cosmos and our social relations but with regard to the human being you know not we have to also you know not be very not be completely naive perhaps you know looking back at the 60s a lot of people fell love and flower power and it was all a little naive in terms of uh what that could really accomplish without um what it was supposing of human nature and also what it could could be accomplished without a more sort of sophisticated practice and philosophy so on the one hand not not wanting to be naive about human being you know the nature of human being but also not wanting to be pessimistic about human beings i want to come back to this as one of the themes uh that's quite central as well so it's quite a big ask and also you know touched on this with buddha dharma as well just following the five precepts could be regarded as only a kind of safeguard for society if everyone did that then society would be a safe place that would allow people to do what they want to do and if part of what they want to do is get awakened then that's good um on one hand or a kind of minimum safeguard for personal liberation on the other so really talking here about ethics as ethos as i explained in seeder and soul as something that's much bigger and has to do with meaningfulness and making life beautiful and worthwhile and that whole question and the sense of um sacredness so what we need is uh a way of navigating that area an instrument something like a compass and we need training and education how to use such an instrument we need to excuse me open up what ethics means beyond just taking care of law and economy to try and show everyone's rights are are kind of not trampled on by someone else's actions but we also can't impose everyone goes northeast or whatever we need a way of navigating methods of navigating an instrument something like a compass and training education how to use that instrument so a way of orienting which is that's different than a prescribed direction as i said not everyone going northeast and uh or prescribed direction together with proscribed directions uh prohibited directions regarding material things material activities do you understand the difference there so rather than saying this actual activity or this thing is is wrong that one is right in itself in in themselves these things those things those activities we prescribe this one and we prescribe that one prohibit that one we need a way of orienting so it's not so much the thing in itself the activity in itself but a way of orienting to this whole question and it might be for the let's call let's say the least capable in society it may be necessary that they are limited to prescribed and prescribed directions it may be but there's also this question you know what's innate capacity and innate limitation when it went with regard to ethics and what's possible with education it's a tricky question and has you know history far back as well before the enlightenment when they took a certain stand on that and they believed everyone was tabular asa was just a matter of education it's tricky but might it be possible for there to be a more widespread education at some point this might sound very elitist but might it be possible for there to be more widespread education that offers and teaches us trains us in in ways of orienting in a practice practices that help us orient in the realm of ethos and opening up that sense of of life and navigating well opening up the sense of beautiful life deep meaningful life and navigating well knowing that that might be different between different people to a certain extent and i think part of that part of what immediately is kind of required and suggested by that way of opening up the or by that way of thinking about ethics and opening up the idea of what we're actually after there what we actually need in the most general sense what comes immediately is the is the possibility and the need for a relationship of love and and of eros with the virtues with the values as i talked about in cedar and salt and as i'm going to go into in a minute you know then this this opens up in many ways how we can think about and explore the whole domain of ethics things like sins of omission start to have their place emotion with regard to ethics starts to have uh its place but at a more mature place i'll come back to these things so if i think about what's my sort of wish list if you like for an ethical system or an approach to ethics a way of thinking about ethics or what do we need what do we need what does it seem to me that we need as a species right now in terms of approaching ethics thinking about ethics constructing frameworks for ethics you know i would say partly why i've already said that it needs to be ethics needs to be more than law more than law and more important than law and ethics needs also to be more than just an idea of my rights your rights needs more than just an idea of our individual rights more generally as i said it um it needs to open up beyond this whole question of what to do what should i do what's right here right in a different sense there and more to this question about how to live what is what is a beautiful life what makes a life really worth living and have depth so it needs to be more than law more than that question more than law more than rights all these things are connected it needs to allow place for this idea of sins of omission or mission sins of omission as well but sins of omission that we can neglect to do certain things and needs to expand that notion and give it place give it space these are these are a list of things that i'm going to weave through i'm going to try to weave together through the talk um and they'll be coming and going in and out as we go through it needs as i said also uh to include emotion but it must transcend rather it must be more than just emotion and it must give us a mature place to our emotion so that's a third thing or fourth depending on how you're counting so not just what to do is one more than laws and rights let's say that's to have place space for sins of omission three and fourth is including emotion but not not not reduced to emotion not limited by emotion and giving mature place to emotion and giving mature place to emotion that would be four it must include love and heroes as i said that would be five number six it must have dimensionality this is really important and i mentioned this in in the cno soul talks but for ethics to work and this is of course all these all these needs and these requirements or this wish list all the elements are connected that's why they can only weave them weave them together rather than present them in separately something needs to be sensed as or granted a higher dimensionality and in which in that dimensionality in which meaningfulness and purpose and sanctity actually reside and without something being sensed we sense as having or granted or believed to have or felt to have a higher dimensionality it's very hard to to make any ethical headway to say anything meaningful or or justifiable about ethics because the justification of whatever we do in ethics needs to be rooted in another dimension you know you say don't care say why the why needs to go to another dimension and as i said meaningfulness purpose and sanctity kind of organically intrinsically reside in in some other dimension it needs we need to sense ethics that way even if sanctity is something secularly kind of secularly secularly conceived doesn't matter so this is a big subject and i want to go into this what does that mean how how how has it been attempted in the past how might we attempt it now but attempts without dimensionality is i'll explain they usually just fail have failed attempts to explain ethics without dimensionality to to promote an ethical system without without dimensionality they've just failed so as i said this uh oh and um and so that's six and then seven would be six is dimensionality seven would be and must be connected if we're talking about dimensionality is questions of ontology what's kind of you know why can you claim something as having a certain dimensionality and therefore intrinsic meaningful meaningfulness purpose purposefulness sanctity you need an ontology ontological and epistemological arguments justification for that so woven into all this is our questions of ontology and epistemology as always unavoidable and uh certainly as buddhist we need to go beyond uh the limited ontology of just emptiness as an answer to everything okay as i explained uh a little bit the other day in one of the other talks so that would be seven and number eight would be a sense of what a human being is what is it to be a human being and what what can a human being be so all this is tied together these eight uh eight items on on the the list of of needs what an ethical system needs nowadays what i think an ethical system needs what we need as a species these days for an ethical system eight things they're all tied together they're not really separate in a way one implies other drags in another and so yes as i said i can't really go through this in in a linear way um so there's a little bit of introduction um some of what i'm going to say uh now tonight we'll see how far we get but some of it may well still sound introductory to a superficial listening you kind of might feel i'm waiting for the meaty bit um some of you won't of course but some of you might be to a superficial listening it might i'm not sure it might sound a little bit introductory but if you understand uh the basic sort of theme or what i'm trying to uh get at here or offer which is um why why should we uh get behind about um the approach of sensing the soul i want to advocate the basic theme is an advocation um an advocating of the sensing with soul approach to ethics but if you so if you understand that theme you'll um perhaps that you've already you'll you'll have immediately heard what we said already is completely um wrapped up in that theme and there's already some uh very good reasons why we're here and what we've already said in why reasons why sensing the soul would be a good approach a really helpful approach one really helpful approach to ethics okay all right so um mentioned this thing all this aspect where just checking i've said everything i want to say so so far i think so um mentioned this aspect about um you know the way we think about ethics needs to be um more than we need to prevent this kind of slide um ethics down to questions of law and rights so it's interesting some of what happened in the exile rebellions extinction rebellions recently and how some people were in in in you know people on the street there were a few voices saying these people xr activists etc they have no respect for law and order they don't care about law and order and that sort of thing is that there's a lot of people who are in that sort of uh protest and you know so let's go into this a little bit law and order are definitely uh or is if we take them together uh law and order in a society is definitely a value if we use that language that harmony is definitely a value but it's rank as a value in the hierarchy of values is always going to be subordinate it has to be subordinate to the ethical values it upholds and supports so the rank of law and order as a value put it together has to be supported to the ethical values that law and order are upholding upholding or whether they support so you know law and order were healthy robust respected in nazi germany and in musilinis italy two very uh cultures with a lot of law and order as far as i understand the history books but ethically the whole thing was on a was on a you know very very dubious is completely completely unethical foundation completely ethically wrong foundation therefore the law and order there were not valuable were anti-values so law and order is not in itself a value it depends let's put it that way depends on the ethical values that it's trying to uphold the purpose of law and order is to uphold ethical values somehow we've kind of as i said but they've kind of got divorced law and order has kind of got divorced from ethics so that people are valuing law and order in and of itself regardless of the ethical questions that are ethical or the ethics that that law and order is supporting whether they you know good ethics or bad ethics so it's interesting you know in when yanai was in court for one of his xr actions not too long ago and the judge uh things at some point in the proceedings and yanai was allowed to present his case we should try to present an ethical case ethical grounds for breaking the law breaking law and order and the judge at some point made the court made the response to everyone that this is a court of law and not a court of ethics um now it sounds like this judge was actually pretty good but his hands were tied and he made a very valuable point it doesn't sound like he really drew out all the implications or maybe even all of what he felt about that limitation this is a court of law not a court of ethics and he might have really wished that it was a court of ethics and have been able to really come down much more on the side of the xr protesters being tried there tried there but basically um that it was not set up uh there was they were not equipped to have an ethical discussion or an ethical court we are not in our society equipped to have such there's no basis there's very little dialogue i mean people debate you know whether stem cell using stem cells is you know ethical or not or euthanasia you know what's it called dignified you know assisted suicide etc again it's back to this question of what is it right to do what ought i to do what ought i not to do to do these that kind of level of discussion what is right what is wrong what ought i to do what ought i not to do and as charles taylor puts it the ought to do is is what he calls the ought to do has been has become divorced from the good to be so it's good do you understand the ought to do that becomes the limitation the circumscribing of the of the ethical investigation what ought i to do i've said before and that whole question has been divorced from the much deeper question if you like of what is it good to be and this whole notion of the good and the beautiful this question of what is it good to be which is this question of what makes a life really worthwhile what makes a life a beautiful life that has been jettisoned and in jet from the whole been jettisoned from philosophical discussion from ethical discussion the divorced and then they're jettisoned and that brings problems things huge problems and one of them is there's the problems it brings um of this divorce of of questions of law from questions of ethics now i don't know what the judge was thinking or feeling but um maybe someone will have the kind of courage at some point someone in that position will have the courage or we will have the the courage to admit the gap admit the gap there admit the whole admit the kind of yawning nihilistic abyss above above which the sort of pomp and power of the law cause attempts to suspend themselves it's it's resting on on you know either nothing a kind of moralistic nihilism or very very thin ice and this is connected to the whole question about you know my right to do this your right to do that my right to do whatever it is my right to go on holiday my right to enjoy myself after work my right to whatever so much gets dragged into this uh into these kind of claims of rights now might be soon that uh my right to um fly for a holiday is reckoned legally or recognized legally somehow as less of an ethically and then legally as less of a right than the right of others to have a have a home that's not flooded or not um in you know on fire or in in drought the right for others to live in a habitable planet might be regarded as a a right that trumps my right to fly on holiday when i feel like it after i've worked hard it might be that that day comes and it might be that day comes sooner i hope it does but um sooner than later but even then even if there is that sort of um if there isn't now that that switch of of the degree of rights that that the height of rights in in public opinion and that gets enshrined in law somehow and ethical might wider ethical might say in law even then i would say still not an adequate and fertile basis for ethics something is missing it's still just about those rights and the sort of competing rights contesting rights and then a decision that this this right actually always trumps that right even then is still still then it won't be adequate it won't be fertile as a basis just that question about rights and you can see even at that level of competing or conflicting rights there's so much dishonesty and distortion that comes in when people talk on that level and that to me betrays the fact that we're actually lacking a means of approaching ethical questions so just have this conversation about rights but there's no there's no actual way of approaching ethical question the means the practices the way of thinking about it just becomes my right versus your right or your right versus my sense of those people on the other side of the world and their rights so much dishonesty and distortion that's just partly partly that betrays not something so much about human nature perhaps but just are lacking of a means of approaching ethical questions so some of you may know this but there was a i think it was a subgroup of xr i think they were called heathrow pause or no that was something else anyway there were a couple of groups who tried to shut down airports or prevent airports from planes from taking off and landing because to draw attention to the huge and often unnecessary amount of carbon emissions that come from flying and they attempted in different ways to stop the functioning of airports for you know a few hours or a day or two days or whatever it was and it was i say interesting but it was also kind of alarming and also totally to be expected and kind of normalized the response of the airport authorities and others so this happened i think uh one one situation was a city airport in the middle of london and a lot of activists went there and just sat in the lobby and sort of blocked entrances and things like that so in an attempt to uh to to stop planes flying for a while and the sort of one of them says dishonest and distorted rhetoric of of the response and statements from the city airport authorities who talked about needing to ensure the safe running or the safe operation of this airport and then gleefully reported that they had ensured that when the police had cleared the protesters and this is just completely normal and expected kind of language and and trope and and attitude and response it hides so much because the use of that word safe operation um is a deliberate deflection and distortion it links the xr protest with terrorism which if you've read the news recently apparently they were linked anyway by a police organization called prevent um and now they've retracted that link but anyway there was in in the rhetoric in the spin of the response this deliberate deflection distortion as if xr protesters are like terrorists airport functioning is safe but you know the carbon dioxide emissions from flying is not safe and doubly so in an airport like city airport where it's mostly really very rich people and corporate executives um flying here and there where they don't need to fly to manchester or you know long days on the train couple of hours or whatever it is the flight the emissions are not necessary the emissions are not safe we know that now calm dogs and emissions are not safe was there anyone whose safety was affected his actual safety was affected by that uh any of the passengers whose safety was affected by that xr sit-in protest it's it's a spin you might as well to safe running the airport you might as well talk about the safe running of al schwitz and wanting to ensure the safe running of al schwitz okay it's it's maybe extreme but but there's a parallel there how ridiculous that sounds if someone if someone was uh an s.s officer was wanting to ensure the safe running of al schwitz the safe emission of unsafe un emission of unnecessary co2 into the atmosphere usually by very rich people who don't need to fly i don't know gas and gas the safe running of al schwitz gas chambers is like the safe the safe release of co2 gas into the into the atmosphere it's just a bigger gas chamber even more kind of insidious i think is uh you know in terms of the kind of not complete honesty and distortion that gets um roped in through certain kind of common tropes um is uh that the xr protests were preventing normal hard-working people putting food on their table and a roof above their heads and people normal people who want to go about their normal life so i heard this on a tv debate um i don't have i don't have a better idea about how how the consciousness how the alarm can be better sounded how the consciousness can be changed in relation to climate change and species instinct I don't have a better idea than xr i have i have a lot of difficulties with how xr does things or what it decides to do but i really don't know a better idea speaking as someone who's been involved in environmental activism for you know a long long time written countless letters try to pursue it in the sort of democratic uh in the line along the lines of democratic process it's a so-called democratic process i don't have a better idea but then there's this trope in response there these xr people are preventing normal hard-working people putting food on their table put having a roof above their heads people who want to normal people who want to go about their normal lives is that even really true is i just it's really a question is it really true did the xr protests really prevent hard-working people putting food on their table that there wasn't food that evening or a roof above their heads is that really true and i'll come back to it because it might be in a couple of in a couple of cases it might be um but what proportion of cases and is it really true it's just a trope it's a spin and regarding normal life it's like what if so-called normal life brings very abnormal disaster for others abnormal as the fires in australia normal life brings abnormal disaster for others and then and then for myself in my normal life too normal life was pursued in 1938 nazi germany by a lot of people i just want to go about my normal life but there's a bigger ethical question here mass extinction mass extermination of species is not normal it's not normal it's by far the most abnormal thing that has occurred on earth since the earth has been here maybe since apart from the beginning of life perhaps maybe that was more normal there's something even more insidious going on with this particular trope because you know almost no one wants to say of course yeah well i you know i don't i don't want anyone to be deprived of food or to lose their job and because there's this gig economy and some people you know in this gig economy where you have no um no benefits no no safety net at all you're just not a slave but but uh there's very little safety net there for you now it's become a reality gig economy and the economy of austerity and so it might be true that for some people getting blocked by an exile protest and then they're late for work and they get fired and they have a gig economy job and they're really on the edge and they're living in a very small place and they're really on the edge and they're living at that level of poverty in society and that that level of vulnerability of course that might be true but one how how how many people does that affect but more importantly what's happened in this trope is the protesters the people who are disrupting get blamed um for actually for decades decades of systematic political socioeconomic um policies of austerity and the gig economy they do something and they're blamed for the potential results on that where actually most of the conditions are resting in decades of um uh socioeconomic policies again which rest on very very shaky ethical foundations so yes certain xr actions i think could have been um better thought out in terms of the demographics and the areas and who they would who exactly they would affect i really do think that but there's also something a little uh well more than a little sneaky and insidious dishonest dis uh disorienting and distorting about what what has become quite a typical kind of response it's such an easy trope and it's hiding something but the larger point again is about uh our ethical thinking needing to be more than more than law we need to the slide into it's just about law and that's all we can kind of uh talk about or this slide into into just ethics is just about rights what are the rights and how do we protect people's rights and all this as i said if we expand it it open if we expand the conversation the idea of what ethics is then it opens up um it opens up areas for what used to be called i think in the catholic sense of omission it's neglecting to do something um so this is this is actually for me quite an important as quite important implications just as a sort of thought experiment um when you compare you know let's take let's take nazi germany as a sort of setting for this thought experiment um and and compare uh ethical transgressions person a speaks out during the third Reich during the reign of the nazis he she they speak out against nazi policy and ideas publicly and at the risk of their life privately they're having an extramarital affair okay they're involved with with someone other married but they're involved with someone else romantically sexually that's person a person b is uh completely faithful to their their partner their spouse but does not speak up about the nazi policies nazi ideas after the war they may say along with so many others that they disagreed and with nazi policies and they thought naziism was terrible but they said that after the war when it was safe okay person a person b and what they do they're not antinomies the point the point here is to ask and kind of see how you i each of us tend to assess ethical misdemeanors you understand what's your reaction to person a and your your ethical reaction and assessment of person a compared to your ethical reaction to person b person a spoke out of the risk of their life but they were having an extramarital affair person b was completely faithful to their spouse but did not speak up until after the war when they said they disagreed and thought nazis was terrible maybe they did disagree and think naziism was terrible but during during the nazi reign they did not during the nazi reign they did not just to ask and see how you tend to us relatively assess those ethical misdemeanors one of them is an omission a sin of omission the second one person b and this also i think i pointed out in the necessity of fantasy it in the five precepts as they usually presented negatively there's no place for a sin of omission so they're actually walking by on the edge of a lake and someone drowning there and to just keep walking mindfully by and then the person drowns or someone else has to save them or whatever and technically speaking that's not an omission that that's not a a a a a transgression an ethical transgression a sin and still keeping five precepts technically speaking of course tikna han has added the positive side to it which is very very helpful but technically speaking it it doesn't the buddhist precept as they're as they usually thought of in terms of the five reasons don't don't leave room for what we ought what we what we can rise up how how much we can rise up ethically and extend ourselves to the higher virtues now what if we translate that this hypothetical scenario these hypothetical ethical transgressions there's two kinds of transgressions their person a is transgression in terms of their marriage persons b is transgression in terms of their sin of omission what they have failed to rise up to and what happens now if you translate that to our situation now where we know about and somehow even participate in a kind of willful willful uh extinction extermination of millions of species and climate change so we know that's going on that those uh actions those policies are perpetuated in our time by our societies just as in nazi germany it was clear what was perpetrated even people said they didn't know about what was going to happen to the jews i think most and not in their gypsies and the homosexuals and etc communist most people knew translate that to our our situation now so this phrase sins of omission can mean different things um but what what i want to point to here is that we need to open up i think we're talking about needs now what do we need to bring to what what does an ethical system need to have and it needs to have the place in it a space in it um uh spaces and places in it for the possibility for the of of aspiring to higher values and virtues for the recognition that it's important and it's good to aspire to higher values higher virtues um um there's limited space for that in ethical systems that are not based on virtue or i wonder that i wonder if there's limited space for those kinds of aspirations or the recognition of their importance and and that it's good to aspire in ethical systems that are not based on virtue i wonder i'm not sure if that's correct but um but it may be these ethical systems based on virtue make make that much more clear let's put it that way so if we go back to the legal thing um i think i've moved i've lost count now since i got ill i was living at guy house i got ill and i moved there basically i moved out the morning of my operation that was it i never went back to guy house since then i think i moved four or five times since then renting one place or another and i've never had never rented in england before because i lived in the states but so i don't know if it's an english thing or what but um um i would say i had four or five places and three different landlords i think um and while it's very clear that um none of my landlords have acted illegally um they've always kept within the bounds of of the law in terms of how they do things or raise the rent or limit limit limit things in this way or that way um and one could say from a certain point of view that they've acted ethically they haven't acted unethically it one would be very hard push now i would you'd struggle to find anyone that would say these people have acted virtuously in their in being a landlord during their dealings with the tenant so there's again in the wider society there's this shrinking away from the idea or other or the attraction to higher values and higher virtues and the place for that as as a possibility and the kind of encouragement to aspire and to reach out um to that kind of thing to that kind of level there's we just need to be we just need to keep within the bounds of law there's a sort of minimum the lowest column of denominator and then that's regard of one that's ethical right sometimes ethical is a bit more than the law but uh this there's a shrinking here so i don't know i'm not sure that it's the case that this kind of thing is not possible in other ethical with other ethical systems but something about a virtue-based ethical system that makes it more apparent and it invites it that sets it up that way so going back to Hartman's hierarchy of values and still with the notion that the higher values will need to rest on the lower and including the the knowing that there will be inevitable antinomies between between different values particularly values at the same level but that kind of virtue-based system value-based system still keeps this what i'm calling um sins of omission that whole notion open and this uh possibility and encouragement stimulation and invitation to to aspire higher to higher values higher virtues so different ethical systems open uh in different ways they open more or less yes not too long ago i overheard a conversation between um two people who each of them was a relatively new parent it was a man and a woman they weren't a couple and so they were each in in in a in a partnership and each had a young child one one young child and they seemed to agree very easily um that very close bonding between mother and child where the mum rarely goes away and breastfeeding is continued until late etc etc this kind of things that kind of very close bonding they seem to agree would guarantee that the child when grown would not cause harm in the world and i just wondered whether that was a bit naive you know peer influence becomes huge as time goes on as does the influence of advertisement and social and cultural norms including ethical ones and i can think of a um a few a family actually that um i've known the children in that family the parents and the children for for a lot of years and the children since they were babies and they're now mostly in their 20s and they have all become you know very nice uh they're very relatively well balanced psychologically they're polite they're you know clean their personal hygiene is okay they're um not obviously unkind as there's you know degree of kindness there they're very okay it seems with expressing affection in their and certainly with their parents and in their social relations etc so that that's not a problem um etc etc but they don't think twice for example about flying many times a year quite wealthy and they don't think twice about what that might contribute to the suffering of others human and non-human and there is also you know it seems to me very little interest or impetus interest in or impetus towards the higher virtues so this is not not quite what i mean by sins of omission but but but it's related so is it enough you know this idea that we won't cause harm if we have um which they did very affectionate parenting with a lot of good healthy physical contact um with mum and dad and and all that taken care of good a pretty good family dynamics you know all that so the affection from and healthy attachment to mother or primary care or whatever is probably i don't think it's probably it's probably not enough to bring about the the kind of ethical maturity the world needs now we may need um moral education which as i said is kind of gone away it's been ruled taboo it's hard to find in our society we may need further moral education whether it's by the family or whatever and the role of education and moral education might be huge but um as i said in our society we lack any but the most basic moral education even that maybe excuse me maybe less really a moral education than one about conforming to norms and obeying the law so what is it what do we need to open up a range of possibility the impetus and the interest in the higher virtues as well as this whole notion of sins of omission and neglected to do something more moral some kind of moral education that is not in place at present in western societies and and that needs to be based on probably a very different way of framing and relating to ethics than is uh you know they're presently the two the two issues the lack of education and the the lack of a good way of framing and relating to ethics they're completely related so of course when there is the possibility to aspire when that's opened and deemed important the possibility to aspire to higher values when it's recognized as something good and then actually love and eros for for virtues for the virtues and love and eros for for ethics becomes possible and becomes normal because there's that possibility of a beyond the possibility of extending rather than just a kind of disgust at what what one sees as one deems or decides is unethical or the kind of sentimentality a kind of disgust or sentimentality you'd get in you know tabloid newspapers daily mail or whatever it's all pretty limited ethically i mean not only is it completely uh sort of trampled in just one direction pretty obvious what what what they're going to propose or not but it's very limited in terms of um the the emotionality in it there's no real place there for genuine love of virtue or ethics and genuine eros so i'm saying that again this as i said is part of the list part of part of the list of needs there needs to be ethics needs to become an area and a domain in in relation to which we can we can and do feel love and in eros and plenty of it and beauty and all because that's all going to be tied in if we i'm using that word eros in the soul making sense so i'm not only saying this because i think ethics is an interesting subject and i love it it's it's that that exactly that is the appropriate relationship with this subject if we're thinking about what is a beautiful life what is a life worth living what is a life with depth and dimensionality and meaningfulness and with this possibility for higher virtues and the beauty of that and extending myself then it's exactly eros and love that is that is an appropriate relationship with that whole domain with that whole subject i remember in the scene of soul talks i i played played a little bit with different and i offered different etymologies um connected with the word virtue and so i don't know if i mentioned these two these two maybe repeat um but talking about i was talking about the etymology of the word or um the kind of phonetic relations not etymological relations but relations of sound um which may not be etymological but nevertheless as i explained in those talks can still function as a part of an association a complex of association so that we associate the word virtue subconsciously with other words so either way it doesn't matter but two two i want to point out here um etymologically or not or associatively phonetically until i want to point out just in relation to what i just said they may be repeats i don't know but i can't remember so the use of the word virtually uh the colloquial use of the word virtually um we talk about um um being well let's talk the other way around we talk about virtual reality so related to the word virtue virtual reality virtual media as an image of something so electronically or on the internet so virtual is related to image and image may be related to virtue virtue may be related to image you understand etymologically phonetically this is what i want to get at the virtues being allowed to to be imaginal allowed to have their imaginal dimensions um so that a virtue uh well let's do the other one so there's this virtual reality so an image which means an image of something a virtual this and so virtues becoming imaginal being allowed to become imaginal virtually also means colloquially it's virtually this is almost that he was virtually whatever virtually he was virtually dead or virtually whatever um um is almost something it's approaching something so both these meanings are kind of image or virtual reality and this almost something or approaching something both of them imply the idea of an image an imaginal uh something imaginal virtue and our lives and our behaviors as um possibly approaching that possibly reflecting refracting that image and um or an i you know an ideal reality and as we said before an ideational imagine an ideal reality in the sense explained in in the four parables talks and this imperfectly approaching instance of that ideal reality here's the ideational imaginal reality of this virtue and we always imperfectly approach it in in the instances of our behavior that's the instantiation of the ideal reality of the idea so this um virtues become uh imaginal and our behavior can be imperfect images of and almost almost approaching that both of these uh allow and imply that eros is a possibility when there's an imaginal beyond when there's a higher dimension something i can't quite reach but i'm trying to reach both of them uh this like this etymology or playing around with the word virtue suggests to us then the dimensionality of virtue and also that eros is a possibility in relationship to them so allowing virtues and values to be ideational images the ideational imaginal implies and brings automatically or involved in that there will be eros then for those virtues and values so talked about the other day when i was talking about people saying oh you have so much willpower actually maybe it's more a matter of eros eros for certain virtues values eros for uh in that case the ideas that wanted to be expressed eros for the future sangha etc love and eros more than willpower also said sometimes of course in a long creative project in a long term relationship in parroting there's going to be times when you're not feeling that eros and same same in uh when we come to ethics and our relationship with virtues and values course there's going to be a time when we don't feel the eros when it doesn't feel juicy when we don't feel inspired and called to what's more beautiful of course yeah but we can still as in a long term creative project if we have the right relationship to it as in a long term intimate relationship or friendship even as in a long term um parenting you know we're still even if we're not in touch with that eros we're still we can still be rooted in in the knowing of something we know firsthand for ourselves this is meaningful for me this is part of my duty i love this even when i don't feel those things i know them this has eros and you can see how many of the elements of the imaginal are there so this connects with with another of the needs i mentioned that the way we think about ethics needs to be needs to include more than our emotions needs to include more than just our moral feeling even so we need to have our emotions our emotions in other words i think ethics is not just a match of cold rationality some people do present such systems and i'll maybe talk about that later in another talk but i think you know our heart and our heart's responses are part of what we what should be involved in our instrument in our compass it's an element of our compass so we need emotions and moral feelings but we need also more than that eros is actually as you know more than an emotion an eros i mean eros in the whole soul making sense that we that we use that term eros so yes we need emotion but we need more than emotion and part of what's more is we need eros and partly we need um a hierarchy of values or some sense of a hierarchy of values i want to come back to that because it means i want to spin that a little bit differently as we go on but that what that really means is we need a conceptual framework so we need emotion but we need more than emotion we need eros we need a conceptual framework and we need a way ways of orienting ways of practicing so more than just emotion to guide us so obviously you know the value of something like passion depends on what it serves and what the intention is just like we talked about law and order passion is an emotion but its value actually its moral value depends on what it's serving and what its intention is loyalty i'm not sure if it's an emotion or a stance but it's connected the value of loyalty even passionate loyalty also depends on its object you know a football supporter completely loyal to their team supporter completely loyal to their team that has a certain value but a pretty limited value in terms of how valuable that passion is and that loyalty is so sometimes you see um you know grown men in the only place where they're really expressing any emotion or any in place you'd see them cry might be in relation to a football result you have to wonder what's what's happening there what's happening with the heart why so limited why so strong in this area so limited in other areas and what value does it have really if it's just about whether a football team loses or wins or whatever so the value is dependent on the value of its object and of course you know for instance the value of the loyalty the value of the loyalty of an SS officer again just take nazi germany as an example the value of a loyalty of an SS officer to Himmler you know the head of the SS that's highly questionable what value value that has i say this because sometimes i run into people who love the sound of soul making and even start playing with images and stuff and seem to kind of shrink their sense of what's important there down to passion the sense of passion as something really important it's not important just the emotion of passion is not inherently important it depends what it's connected to what it serves what the intentions are what the intentions are what its objects are i want to say something as well just in connection with the emotions again because it can be that as i said i feel like they're very important they have a very important place in terms of our ethical sensibility and how how we're going to approach ethics and and how we orient and navigate in our ethical instrument our soul instrument regarding ethics but um we can also sometimes overdo that and not see kind of blind ourselves a little bit blinker ourselves to other other other things if we put too much emphasis on on the emotion so take for example the idea a very beautiful idea of grief rituals and grief ceremonies which some of us have been involved in and are starting more widely now say with regard to species extinction or climate change and it's interesting those grief rituals the person might come expecting a space where they can really grieve and wail and cry and it be okay and it be kind of supported and mirrored and there's a shared space for sort of intense deep grief griefing emotion but what people can find and what i think i think you will find if you attend a few of these things is that a grief ritual may not lead to or support an emotion of grief and it may it may not at all be because anything weird is going on in the dynamics or it wasn't a trust trustworthy space or safe space it actually depends how the ritual is done and how it's held so oftentimes rituals kind of distill a ritual distills something and contains it and connects levels ritual connects levels so or some ways of thinking about riches they connect levels and this is very important for soul making so for example we connect matter and the imaginal dimensions or the dimensions of divinity and that's the kind of the transubstantiation of objects and matter and you know that's something that happens in or can happen in a ritual is very powerful for the soul and as a mentioning of the day it may involve giving and receiving and grace and these elements this distilling of something is containing of something and particularly this i this element of connecting levels and also this giving and receiving and grace all of that may not lead to a sort of opening of the floodgates of in this case grief so it depends what the ritual is trying to do and how it is set up and kind of what levels it's aimed at and this is actually quite important i think for soul makers to understand i think you know is there a place for both spaces and call them rituals or ceremonies or whatever where there can be collective grief and the depth of that grief regarding you know species loss extinction extermination can be felt you know and held together in a safe space and recognized and valued and moved through this feeling the grief opening to it you know the importance also there of the heart's capacity expanding because as i said you know many times recently there can be so much grief there part part of the work that we do in meditation is to actually expand the heart's capacity that it knows it can feel this terrible awful seemingly bottomless griefs love it's not even mine and and the heart is big enough and knows how to let that move through and how to hold it well so can there be can we have place for that kind of space and ritual together and do we know how to set that up and can there also be you know can also there also be this contextualizing of grief through ritual and the ritual that more and it's the way that it's holding the space and the way that it's understanding how we human beings and those taking part in the ritual are relating to the whole situation and the species loss etc is contextualizing it and contextualizing it with dimension and imaginary and contextualizing it for the soul not just for the heart and that might be a lot much a lot more calmer a lot more sober a lot more even silent but out of it might come strength power stamina so theoretically just having the grief and opening to it one moves through the grief to to to you know be able to be empowered to act etc yes but there's in a way there's openness and strength from both these kinds of rituals potentially it's openness and strength power and stamina through both these kinds of rituals but they come in very different ways and then they're given to the being in very different ways the openness and the strength the power of stamina so emotions are vital but they're not enough they're not enough they're not enough so we're talking about the main thrust of exploring the possibility of soul making practice as a basis and as an approach to ethics and that can happen in two ways as explained in the scene of soul talks one is through values and virtues becoming or being allowed to become image imaginal images ideational imaginal images imaginal ideas whatever we're going to call that so that's one way the values and virtues become imaginal so to speak imaginal ideas it can also come through an image an imaginal figure and that imaginal figure implies or implicit in that imaginal figure you are certain values and certain virtues and then there are life kind of kind of so in in that implication it already implies their sort of holiness kind of indirectly but working with the image can also lead to our manifesting those values and virtues our eros for those values and virtues and then our life refracting expressing those values and virtues in its imperfect mimicry and echoing of of the image and the duty from the image or duties from the image so if we talk about ethics in terms of you know virtues we we talk about virtue ethics then you know virtues rest on on a sense of values rather than an actual system or an enforcement of law so that virtue ethics rests on rests on that sense it's the sense it's really on on my sense of values rather than a kind of rational system or an enforcement flaw that's the kind of tenor of virtue ethics and so the soul you know soul making approach would also you know most easily fit with virtue ethics as i explained and then again it rests on a sense of values rather than a rationally worked out you know a system of rational explanation or guide or or some kind of enforcement of law or code or you know guidelines ethical guidelines and a sense of values just extrapolated really here from what a lot of all seven sets in the ceiling so a sense of values really involves sensing them with soul in other words this ideational imaginal the sense of the ideational imaginal and sensing that so implies all the eros and everything else the sense of beauty and devotion duty and meaningfulness and all all the elements so then ethics in that sense implies and needs um sensing with soul to a certain extent with respect to the values so let's let's go into this a little bit when we um sense the things and the beings of the world with soul values are there and reverence is there as elements of the imagineer and we're sensing the soul values and reverence are there just because they're elements of the imaginal so there's a natural ethical relationship with them to whatever we're sensing the soul however there will always be something some object or persons or whatever left out of our sensing the soul until we notice them and give them attention and they are subsumed into the soul making dynamic is also true that some um fantasies involve enemies what we might call enemies so the question what becomes of our ethical relationship with those people who are are imaginal or fantastical enemies oh if i've got an you know an image of a warrior protecting the earth from enemies what about our ethical relationship with those enemies so here we can talk about the imaginal duty and the refraction of that how how this what our duty is in relation to a certain image but also the theater like nature we've gone into all this before but in a way those um enemies need to be subsumed they need to become imaginal as well otherwise there's a danger of rarefying that rarefying the the adversity to yeah rarefying the enemy too much so it's you know too much to expect this is important to understand it's too much to expect anyone to be sensing the soul all the time and with respect to everything it's actually impossible and to be sensing the soul with respect to everything because everything is is the category that's going to get bigger and wider and when when the soul making dynamic kicks in because it creates discovers more things more aspects so that's impossible anyway but it may be um as sensing the soul becomes more normal and more digested that any situation or thing that we attend to or you know with respect to which we we we have to make some kind of choice like a like an important choice or a major choice that feels major important for us it may be that um that situation becomes sensed with soul and that therefore our relation with it becomes ethical because it's it's reverential etc if we have sensing the soul as the basic definition of uh of virtue or ethical living the basic approach let's say it will not rid us of the inevitability of antinomies between values at the same level that's not that can't happen um i mean it may rid a person of an antinomy that they have between two values sometimes when i explore it when i bring the soul making sensibility and practice to it and i actually find that x is more soul making for me than y even though someone else may have the reverse sense they might find y more soul making than x but if everyone was trained in soul making dialogue practice and approaching ethical choices and and virtues through it um that person's choice even though the other person disagrees they they choose x i choose y they choose x over y i choose y over x if everyone was trained in soul making dharma and their approach to ethics um the person's choice would still be respected as valid if we've got a sense that it was honestly and authentically uh sensed with soul so i'm trying to get out here is explore this is it possible that sensing the soul could become a more widely established practice and basis even for ethics i mean that might be a total pipe dream but i'm just exploring the theoretical possibility at least or the theoretical side of the possibility um part of the problem with ethics is said is that um when we don't ethics as we think about now is that when we don't have um a notion of dimensionality when we don't have a sense of dimensionality or when when any idea or notion of dimensionality has been refused has been shut out disallowed as is quite common and quite popular these days and then actually it's very it's very there can be no shared ethics then there's nothing then to prevent someone's ethics from being purely contingent learned arbitrary and nothing to be someone's this is my right that's your right this is and this is how i think about ethics that's how you think about ethics but it could be held as i said for purely contingent or arbitrary reasons or held principally in other words for what are actually not ethical reasons at all that something amoral not immoral but as in wrong but amoral it's just has nothing to do with morality so without dimensionality it's hard to justify um and it's hard to even know where a person's so-called ethics are coming from and so ethics is exactly prey to post-modern nihilistic relativism because of this absence of dimensionality again if we pick up a few strands from what we talked about here and in the um sealant soul talks and put them together if we combine Hartman's notion of that firmament of values which has an objective existence but has a kind of range and width that usually almost always exceeds uh the kind of focus of any age of any culture or any individual um and that also contains within it numerous antinomies we combine that idea of the firmament of values with a really a demand for a sense of dimensionality i'm going to come back to this dimensionality question in more detail later but if we combine this idea of a firmament of values with it we need um to avoid this kind of post-modern nihilistic relativism with regard to ethics we need some kind of ethics needs to be rooted in something so i'm saying doesn't matter wishes or needs let's say a demand for some kind of sense of dimensionality what will give us that well the soul making sensing with soul gives us a sense of dimensionality implicitly it's one of the elements so we can get a sense of dimensionality for this or that or this or that virtue or epic or or even just this or that action that we're thinking about um from the soul making dharma practice and with all that implies about the ideational imaginable so those those two things the firmament of values um which does have a kind of objective existence a sense of dimensionality a sense actual practical practiced sense of dimensionality and we add the notion that we can trust the the disciplined or trained soul to sense the ethical and to be touched by it to want to move towards it to have an erotic relationship with it and to want to manifest some or other of those inherently existing values in other words the duty as well as part of it so if we combine all that this kind of trust in uh in the soul making dharma practice a demand for a sense of dimensionality which we can get also through um soul making dharma practice and there's still this notion of an objective but you know huge hugely range firmament of value if we combine all that then combine all that then there is an objectively or independently existing ethics to a certain extent which we can discern epistemologically through the practice by our careful sensibility and sensitivity something which can be trained and maybe in different ways maybe there's other ways apart from soul making dharma practice but certainly including by training in soul making and a recognition of and a familiarity with the elements of the imaginal these are the things this familiarity and recognition of the elements of the imagine tell me when i'm on the right track when the whole thing has become soulful it's got that sense of dimensionality but also then i can trust this and still there will be antinomies and differences of opinion and inclination and feeling between different people of course but antinomies exist anyway for individuals within themselves antinomies are unavoidable in ethical life stressed in the seal and soul talks they're unavoidable but if we ourselves and society are aware of both the independent existence of this value firmament it's wide range the inevitability of antinomies both within and between individuals then a more at least a more understanding and harmonious existence in society might be possible do you understand if if we and most or a lot of other people in society are aware there is this independent it's been independently existing value firm it's got a huge range there will be inevitably be antinomies both within myself and within individuals then at least we can have more understanding and a kind of more harmonious coexistence in society i mean of course it might also be i think it probably would be the case that if soul making training and sensibilities were almost universally trained let's just dream that for a minute um in members of society that certain seeming antinomies would be universally understood to be not really antinomies but oppositions between uh let's say moral or soulful values and amoral values that are kind of ego values or greed values not really antinomies at all i mean for example i don't know like the expansion of Heathrow Airport so again the relationship with emotions notice one can have strong opinions and feelings regarding a value without a sense of soul making and selffulness there there's no dimensionality and therefore in this in that way of approaching things in the soul making way of approaching ethics then it wouldn't be wouldn't be trustworthy just just because there's an intense feeling just because there's a strong opinion without that sense of dimensionality and without the other also the beauty and the other elements of the imagine it's not trustworthy it's not fully trustworthy in that way of thinking about it so this is hard i mean as a dream if we're dreaming this or proposing this because to to kind of proper that as desirable to say it would be great if everyone approached ethics or at least a lot of people approached ethics through sensing the soul from the soul making dharma practice that would be you know actually to insist on or at least to say is desirable basically a new epistemology you're basically insisting on a new epistemology or saying it's better to have a new epistemology at least for the domain of ethics and for any new epistemology to take root and spread and even come to be a norm one day in the wider society is quite an ask and and a pretty rare thing i don't know perhaps the last sort of major shift of epistemology was the shift of a scientific materialist worldview and it's um it's a epistemology hundreds of years ago so an epistemology is already dominant in a culture we inherit it and it's hard to question it still though trying to place a new ontology first in other words before the epistemology in other words just saying this is ethical this is the truth before an epistemology before a way of teaching people how they might recognize something as more valuable in other words just presenting ontology this is more valuable than that is uh it's probably harder than opening the epistemology in the area of ethics actually how might one sense for oneself that this is more valuable than that so in this hope wish fantasy dream uh ridiculous impossibility pipe dream um it's a big ask shifting ontology is huge shifting off ontology just uh sort of out of the blue and kind of cold uh it's probably very hard before we've shifted and epistemology offered offered the possibility of epistemology by epistemology i mean the practice by which one can come to experience things and sense things for oneself palpably to measure between different values or different ethical choices so um the other day i can't remember which talk it was on probably the one i told you we talked about the possibility of opening up our and moving forward our sense of ontology and epistemology um by allowing and giving place and importance significant place to eros in other words almost partly basing ontology and epistemology on eros of course that's a that's a really uh uh an idea that a lot of people would um you know very quickly object to and be horrified by i read not too long ago a paper by a i don't know if he's a philosopher or a history of historian or philosophy or something a guy called wayne hankey who um i must say i'm not a huge fan of and it was a paper uh really quite polemically uh critiquing john milbank the theologian philosopher i mentioned the other day excuse me who's associated with what they call the radical orthodoxy movement these days and um i want to read a little bit of what wayne hankey says and what he criticizes in john milbank's approach uh and as i mentioned the other day john milbank's approach seems to have a lot of affinity and overlap and commonality with what we've been working out with the soul making tire but he's done it in an orthodox christian context um and through very very different channels of neoplatonism and etc through western philosophy and theology so he's done it through very different channels than we have um but to me it's quite exciting and a little bit i've read so far and what i've seen on youtube and things but quite keen um anyway i read this wayne hankey paper and um i'm gonna read a little bit what his critiques uh so he says um in trying to sum up um what he's attacking here in john milbank's approach is uh he says theory belongs to composition and is not separable from it i have to translate a bit he means really that um theory is something that we just we can create so again we have this poiesis um common with our with our notions and this possibility of creating conceptual frameworks etc so it's definitely not exactly the same there's probably quite a lot of differences between what john milbank's saying what we're opening up um and he's i think still very much sees his his project as very much in process but anyway theory belongs to composition otherwise it's a creative artistic endeavor and is not separable from it the requirement that we join in the cosmic and divine poiesis creativity artistic creativity governed not by truth but by desire means that there can be no theoretical distance or objectivity theory theory occurs as a necessarily incomplete moment within praxis so translate that basically in our terms it's saying this is terrible if you if you follow your desire eros and not something called truth and you create theory or create conceptual frameworks out guided by your eros and desire then there can be no theoretical object objectivity and it's just something that occurs as a stage as an incomplete um movement direction thrust and temporary stage within within practice so in a way that sounds very similar to uh the kind of logos of logo in in in soul making dharma but then he doesn't like this at all wane hank he doesn't like this at all he continues um what belongs to theory is self-consciously constructed when within poiesis practice and desire in order to stand against modern theoretical truthfulness so there's this again in our language this kind of uh standoff of this kind of notion of um the emptiness of ultimate truth and any any singly finally true conceptual framework of things and then our participation in the creation and discovery of theory and conceptual framework and logoi etc um using our uh using all the aspects of our soul and our eros and that stands against and kind of in opposition to um sort of what he's called modern theoretical truthfulness in terms of classical thinking about there is an objective truth and he continues when we know that quote we know what we want to know will when will to know in accord in accord with desire and cannot submit that desire to knowledge or knowledge to truth the nihilist gap has already opened so again i'm afraid of it when we in when we know that we you know when we understand that knowledge is something that and even truth is something that's guided by desire whether we admit it or not whether we're conscious of it or not that eros comes in to our decisions about what is true what conceptual frameworks we pick up when we know that and when we um rather than see that as a problem when we uh take it on board and go with it in the deepest and fullest and richest and the soulful way that we can and when we will to know in accord with our desire as he said and cannot submit that desire to knowledge or knowledge to truth in other words we leave totally aside any requirements that it there are the desire guiding our knowledge be limited by something called truth etc etc or objective knowledge then the nihilist gap has already opened the gap of you can think anything believe anything ethically uh philosophically religiously etc um so just to say i wouldn't agree with that um cannot submit that desire to knowledge or knowledge to truth there are as i said in the talks on the four parables series and uh just touched on it briefly the other day there are limits to the eros it's not just that uh there are other constraints in our movement towards truth and one of them is just this um predict you know power of predictability we talked about in scientific provisional truths for example that's a kind of tells me that i know something it predicts like newton's laws predicts gave that example but also um dependent fading um is uh telling me that i you know is a prediction that tells me that something valid here of provisional truth but he said if that's the case um if we know what we want to know and we will to know in accord with desire another we let the eros lead then the nihilist gap has already opened but i i would say not not the nihilist gap has not opened if the desire is disciplined if it's disciplined desire by which i mean um that it's uh rooted in and uh shaped by a really sophisticated um and deep and careful practice like uh soul making practice and then the eros there is is disciplined it's not just desire willy-nilly random desire that would open the nihilist gap so something else is actually disciplined and so that gap doesn't open in in the way that dawain hankie thinks so um what does open is a truth that's neither objective nor subjective because this kind of trying to cling to a purely objective truth or notions that truth is something purely objective completely independently objective it's very hard to uh it's very hard to kind of sustain that anymore as i explained the other day but with the with the inclusion and incorporation of eros as a guide for our conceptual frameworks for our logoi for our ideas for our notions for our provisional truths the discipline of eros when it's in practice in a soul making way sensing with soul then we arrive at something that's neither objective nor subjective we arrive at truths logoi conceptual frameworks that are true but neither objective nor subjective which must be part of a new definition of truth because the old one of something purely objective is very hard as i said to hang on to and then it's not a nihilistic free-for-all and in the area of ethics similarly it's not a nihilistic free-for-all so we talked the other day when we were talking about an ontology or ontology or epistemology based partly on eros and how eros might be redeemed along with other aspects of our being and affects might be redeemed and given place in in in a sort of more sophisticated and more powerful and far-reaching ontology so we talked about truth being not something one finally ever arrives at but more of a journey we talked about this notion of truth that Descartes had that the truth true or real things are just what's clear and discrete and easily comprehended by the mind and how if we don't buy into that definition then we actually and and and if we also see that truth may be more a journey and there are provisional truths in science as there are in dharma and there's a whole journey there eros doesn't leave us with clear discrete things easily comprehended by the mind but opens up their dimensions and their shading into divinity and their unfathomability and their complexity and multi-aspected nature all this taken together again suggests that eros maybe in john millbank's word ontologically disclosive may have a status that is ontologically to stay disclosive in other words it tells us about the truth it tells us about reality it leads us and it opens disclose to open to open up for us what's what's what might be truth a truth truth in inverted commas because truth is understood differently than in in the sort of well let's say definitely in in you know classical modernist terms so eros redeemed and given ontological and epistemological value regarding objects but also regarding conceptual frameworks because this to me is a really exciting and important possibility way of opening up our thinking and validating it perhaps more positively validating eros validating our soul making experience validating what's possible there last thing i think for today um it's interesting just sticking with this idea about so we're talking about the possibility of soul making practice as as basis or an approach to ethics that can happen different ways and what might it be just to dream into the possibility of that being more widely spread in society and part of that what would be needed there is a recognition of excuse me a bit more recognition of the necessity to give some ontological and epistemological value or value regarding ontology and epistemology to eros and the notion of participation and the notion of truth that is not a final ultimate objective independently existent truth but a journey and a continuous opening up of provisional truths and participatory um last thing to say was it's interesting in this connection in um years ago i told this story in some other place for some other reason but years ago my colleague steven bachelor um um he was um scheduled to teach a retreat on ethics ethics was the subject um and no one signed up for it it got zero zero interest um and of course that wouldn't happen these days because he's just very famous so people would go just for his name but i thought that was very telling you know the fact that no one signed up for that retreat um because clearly no one was interested in ethics and in a way ethics can seem like a very boring subject um and again if you go back to what john millbank where i read that quote from john millbank the other day um boredom if you remember was one of the um was in his list where is it in his list of uh what he what was kind of disallowed um as having any ontological disclosive status so eros anxiety boredom trust poetic response faith hope charity and so forth are disallowed ontologically disclosive status he said well one way of understanding uh you know a lack of interest is also something is boring people don't sign up because it's not interested because it's because it seems boring boredom is also um uh you know can be understood as a lack of eros when there's boredom there's lack of eros when there's eros there's no boredom but if we if we now just expand a little bit on this idea of the ontological and epistemological value of eros potentially then it might be that um again what's happening is boredom as an absence of eros is telling me um at its best i mean boredom at its best i'm bored with this it's not because i'm not uh i'm not open to being erotically engaged i'm not open to being mentally and soulfully engaged but boredom at its best it might be telling me there's not enough here in these ideas or this presentation or this picture of how things are there's not enough truth value or truth possibility here let's say if truth is a journey there's not enough truth possibility so that the usual way we think about ethics again uh why people didn't sign up is possibly because how they thought about ethics was it's just not interesting it's actually boring because the way it's presented flatly as a question of right and wrong and ought to do without this other dimension or these other whole other dimension this whole other depth of richness and soulfulness around the question of how what is it good to be what is the worthwhile life what is the beautiful life might be that people were sensing in that there's not enough truth value when it's limited when when the ethics as a subject is is kind of uh trampled and amputated and um um dis-dimensionalized in that way there's not enough truth possibility here and that's actually where the boredom sense is coming from there's also because there's not enough erotic possibility they're linked together and that's where the the boredom is coming from there's neither enough juice nor enough truth possibility in the way we usually conceive of ethics okay let's stop there for tonight

 Okay, what I would like to do today is to offer a few things that might be helpful working with pain, working with predominantly physical pain. And there's some of it, as I'll come back to some of it, will apply very well to mental pain. But offer a few things that may be helpful, hopefully will be helpful in working with physical pain, pain in meditation, developing the kind of skill and art in meditation in different ways, skills and arts that can suddenly reduce the suffering around and in relation to pain. But also actually attenuate ease pain, attenuate it, reduce the actual sensations of pain. And or as well as that, can, what should we say, sanctify the pain, the very unpleasant sensations, transubstantiate them, divinize them. And I'll explain what's involved there and what we mean by that. So certainly, we want to address meditative skills, meditative approaches, development of those arts and meditation that can reduce the suffering that comes with pain and relationship to pain, can also reduce pain, the actual intensity of pain sometimes quite very dramatically. And also the kind of transubstantiation, divinization, sacramentalization of pain. So I should say, of course, I'm personally aware through direct experience and painfully aware. The pain, we could say there's three types, you know, this kind of occasional pain, just from, for example, sitting a really long time in meditation, repeatedly on the tree, back hurts, the knees hurt, this or that hurt, the hips hurt, and there's occasional pain or from, you know, whatever it is. There's also chronically recurrent pain, you know, as a kind of second category. It's maybe not all the time in an uninterrupted way, but it keeps returning. Maybe it never fades completely, maybe it does fade completely at times, or it may fade naturally, just go away. But it keeps coming back. It's a chronic feature of one's life. It just keeps coming back. One has to deal with that. And then there's just sort of, in a way, simply chronic pain, it's just there all the time. So in a way, the, what I'd like to offer here, ways of working in meditation applies across the board there to all kinds of pain. However, in the third category, where there's pain that's just chronic, it's just there all the time, it won't be possible all the time to engage some of these practices, because one's life will naturally need to be busy doing other stuff, interacting with other people, of course, working. And that's hard. So I have to meet the world, be in the world, do in the world, in relationship and work and whatever else. And there's this pain and it's pulling on the attention, but it's not possible to give it the whole-hearted fullness of intention or the kind of skill and subtlety and sophistication of the kinds of attention of some of the practices I'm going to talk about all the time, because I'm busy doing other stuff. Can't give it the same quality of attention as I can when I'm not doing anything else but sitting down or standing or walking to meditate. And so, of course, thankfully now, most people, certainly in the West, hopefully more and more in the second or third world countries, have access to pain-killing medication and you do not to forget that if there's just chronic pain, because we can't be in deliberate, full-on, artful meditation, meditative attention with it all the time. But actually what I'm talking about applies to all three categories. Really what I'm going to do is just briefly list a selection of practices, not an exhaustive list at all. What it is though is a list in a little bit of a progressive or ascending order of skill or development or art. In other words, I'll start with practices and meditative approaches that are relatively easy, relatively well known as well, of course, and then include more and more that are actually, well, a lot more powerful but also a lot more difficult to develop. What I really want to stress though is that they're absolutely possible. I'm not talking about anything that's not possible. It just, so some of this, towards the end of the list, or even the middle of the list, sounds completely outlandish and otherworldly and impossible for a human being with a physical body to accomplish. That's just not true. It's just not true. It's so much a matter of finding the right ways to practice and applying oneself in the right ways and really developing one's art, stage by stage. Some of the things later in the list will depend on the arts developed in the earlier stages of the list. They build on those stages as platforms. Then what we're talking about is absolutely possible, absolutely possible, and available accessible to us as human beings. No reason why not. I'm not going to go into too much detail around technique because I've done so for, actually, most of these practices elsewhere, and either written about them in Sing the Freeze or talked about them in different talks over the years, and given quite a lot of detail of technique there. What I do want to do is mention them and give some explanations of what we need to understand here. I also want to include soul-making practices in relation to pain, sensing pain with soul, etc. Talking predominantly about physical pain, but much that I'm saying will apply to mental dukkha as well. If you're listening at a time when the mental dukkha is what's interesting to you, then see if you can see how much of what I'm offering here is adaptable and try it. Occasionally, of course, as I go, I'll try to remember and remind and put things in terms of mental dukkha as well. The first thing I should say is that probably everyone knows after being a young child that if we tense our muscles with pain, it usually makes things worse. Not always, but usually makes things worse. If there's pain, a first thing to do for working in meditation is just relax the rest of the body as much as possible because that tensing of the musculature is only adding to the problem. The first thing that may be very obvious is quite important, just relax the body as much as possible. The first practice is what we might call just simple mindfulness or bare attention. We don't want to use that word, but let's use it right now. Just bringing mindfulness and a kind of bare attention to the pain, what does that mean? It means trying to drop the story around the pain, the story that goes with it of how it shouldn't be there and why me and maybe I'll be a cripple the rest of my life or whatever it is or I am this way or it's not fair or compared to other people, whatever it is, whatever story there is there. The attempt with the way of looking we call simple mindfulness or bare attention is to drop the story. One of the strands of unhelpful relationship as we're trying to drop, dropping the story and seeing if it's possible to come as part of the dropping the story to come really into the present moment, into let's say bare or direct contact with the sensations of the pain. So, less story, just what does this actually feel like and what does it feel like now, now in this present moment? Not dwelling on how long it has been that way, how long this pain has been around, not dwelling on how long it will be or might be this way. So we're not joining the dots. If you know the practice I talk about sometimes dot to dot, seeing how pain gets constructed or actually most phenomena get constructed but certainly dukkha phenomena get constructed by joining the dots in time and joining the dots in space. So that's part of dropping the story but really seeing, can I come in now? What does it feel like? What does it feel like now? What's the sense of it now? What's my experience of it now? Really getting that sense in the present moment, coming back to the present moment. So what's happening if you like is we're jettisoning the story but we're also jettisoning the projections of the mind into the past and the future. So that what we're relating to and what we're actually perceiving and carrying in the moment is not a temporally extended experience. It's then made heavier and more difficult by that sense of temporal extension all the way back in the past, all the way potentially in the future with the worry of all that. What it really is is this sensation right now, these sensations right now. It might also be possible as an aspect here, an aspect of what we call mindfulness and bear attention to, even sometimes drop the label pain. Sometimes even that word pain, the labeling of it starts to constitute something as pain. In other words, the label is not a neutral factor. It's not there is something and then I label it afterwards and it would feel just the same if I labeled it tomato, if I labeled it pleasure or if I labeled it whatever. And we start to realize that pain is actually a fabricating constitutive factor. So part of the sort of attempt in the way of looking that we call mindfulness, simple mindfulness or bear attention is this, see if I can drop the labeling pain. The mind is either doing kind of automatically or deliberately. Sometimes it might be labeling in a sort of Mahasi technique way which can be really helpful but at some point it's like maybe that labeling is actually not so helpful because it's actually part of consolidating, solidifying, promulgating something. So that's really interesting as well. So less story, more present moment which means less temporal extension, less past and future and the worry to that, less construction by joining the dots in time. I could say also in space perhaps but let's just stick with the time one for now. Dropping the label, labeling of pain etc. In all that there's less reactivity we could say. And in a way one's also trying to be less reactive. It's part of even that initial movement of just relaxing, just relax the body. See if I can be less reactive here at different levels of my being. And what this can lead to if I just stay steady with that practice, keep trying with that practice, bringing that way of looking, the mindfulness of their attention is that it might just become, the pain just becomes, it's just sensations. It's stripped of all these other levels of story and temporal extension and all that. And even it might be stripped of the label of pain, it's just unpleasant sensations. It might be, if the mindfulness is really strong, that even you find even at this very basic level that if you really sustain the mindfulness in these ways, keep kind of dropping those unhelpful factors out, the temporal extending, the story, the labeling, the reactivity at certain level, that it might be then if the mindfulness is really sustained and really strong and there's quite an intensity to the mindfulness that the degree of unpleasantness, really means the degree of pain, is reduces right there as I'm attending to it, very carefully very intently with the mindfulness moment after moment. So that's what we might call the first practice. Actually we might call it one version of the first practice because a second way of doing that practice would be pretty much the same thing but with a much more spacious awareness. So in the first practice, let's say it was my back hurting or the small of my back or my knee or something, and focuses the attention in a kind of narrow way on those sensations there and just works to kind of support the way of looking. We're calling mindfulness a bare attention which when we unpacked it meant those things that I explained. And it's just focusing there in that small region, narrow attention over and over, supporting, engaging that way of looking that we call mindfulness a bare attention. But one could also do the same thing within a much, much larger space. So actually again, relax the body then, let the awareness get really large. I mean larger than the room that you're in, as large as up to the sky, even larger, if it's possible. One way of really helping open up the awareness to a more spacious awareness like that is by listening because sounds come from all different distances and directions and just give some attention to listening. If you can do that for a while, just disregarding the pain, great. If you need to include the pain and open up to the listening, either way. But somehow just trying or supporting or letting the awareness open up much more spaciously. Then the sensations of pain, the sensations of pain, the vedana, the unpleasant vedana means the same thing, that are arising and passing there, flickering as we pay more attention. We'll notice all kinds of qualities of their texture and the fact that it kind of throbs or pulses and flickers, all of it meaning it's changing in time. We'll just naturally notice that. But all that kind of dance of appearing, disappearing, throbbing, pulsating, fluctuating sensations occurring in the body or somewhere in the body have a much larger context of this much, much larger space. So it's only a small area bubbling away like this, unpleasantly, in a much, much larger context. In a way, so you have to practice this to actually see, oh, this is a really, really helpful thing to do. In a way we could say, well, what's happened then is that instead of the pain taking up, let's say, 100 or 90 percent of the, let's call it the space of our awareness, it's taking up much, much less. And we actually have that sense, here's just this area of pain, a small area of pain in a much, much faster space. And so its impact on the being, on the psyche, on the chitta, the felt sense of it is of something relatively small in a much larger space. Actually even that too, we could stay with that and it can go very, to very deep, beautiful places, change our whole sense, open up our whole sense of things. But whether we practice it with a narrow attention, as I described it first, or with this much more spacious attention and awareness, basically that method of mindfulness, or bare attention, both those ways of doing it, will lead to a lessening of suffering in the moment. There will be less suffering in relation to or from the pain in the moment. We could say there's less fabrication of the suffering because I realize then, oh, it's only when I look in these other ways, when I do kind of unwittingly drag in the temporal extension, when I do bring in my story and the poor me and the etc. Why me and the etc. and I do bring in the kind of labelling in a way that's actually constituting and solidifying something. It's only when I do that that the pain is stronger. When I let go, when I take those things out, or drop them out of the way of looking, the suffering is stronger when those things are there. When I take those things out, the suffering is less. In other words, through this way of looking, why if it was bare attention, narrow or large attention, we are fabricating less suffering. There is less suffering fabricated. Maybe as we practice some fairly good chance that at times there will also be less fabrication of the unpleasant vedna, actually less pain, not just less suffering around in relation to pain, but less pain too. So all these factors, they're fabricators. So we really want to understand this. Why? What's happening here? Just what we said, these factors of bringing the self in, bringing the story in, bringing the reactivity in, papansha, temporal extension, labeling, they're all fabricators of vedna. So sometimes people talk as if vedna is just a given. It's what it is, and then all we can do is minimise the suffering, the second hour in relationship. And it might be with just these first practice, or these two versions of the first practice, that that's what we see. Yes, I can minimise the suffering around it, but the pain, the intensity of the unpleasant vedna remains what it is. As we go into the other practices, that whole teaching of the two arrows, if you're familiar with it from Buddha, is... Is it the teaching? Yes. Well, it's not quite the teaching of the two arrows, but the idea that there's... Suffering is an unnecessary addition to pain. That's seen as a provisional truth, a provisional teaching. And we start to realise that, as with describing the Wheel of Dependent Origination, the 12 links that self, pa-pansha, reactivity, all this, they will fabricate the whole... All the elements of that wheel, all the links of that chain. So as there's more fabrications, I've seen more of the fabrications of self, more story, more poor me, more whymie, whatever it is, me compared to other people who I'm sure can sit comfortably and whatever, all that, as there are more of those kinds of fabrication, there's more fabrication of suffering, but there's also possibly more fabrication of it. And we may start to see it even at this level, even at this level, or it may have to wait till the next levels of practice go into in a second. Usually where there's... Where there's Vedana, actually, there's usually some form of clinging. Now you just slightly expand what I mean by clinging there. Usually when there's pleasant Vedana, we cling to it, we grasp at it, we want to get more of it, or we want to hang onto it at least, so there's clinging in the kind of... The most common sense of that word. Usually, or actually I'd say always, when there's unpleasant Vedana... Let's start again. Always when there's pleasant Vedana, there's clinging. I know that's what... Some of you won't have heard that, but if you are familiar enough with my teachings on dependent origination and emptiness, etc., I would say always. Always where there's pleasant... Always where there's Vedana, there's clinging. Let's just say the habitual response to... for now, at a certain level, the habitual response to pleasant or unpleasant Vedana is clinging. We try to hang onto the pleasant or get more of it, and we try to push away. We're aversive to the unpleasant. Also, the so-called neutral, neither pleasant or unpleasant, we tend to fall asleep. Actually, there's a kind of clinging in that. Or get dull, disinterested, bored, uninterested, bored. So what we're... This clinging, what we want to understand is how this clinging works as a fabricator. So there's one way, like I said, when there's really a lot of pushing away or trying to hold on, there's this... The pain's very strong, there's a contraction at the muscles, and that contraction doesn't help. There's also contraction of awareness that happens with clinging. And as we mentioned when we talked about the second version of mindfulness, much more spacious awareness, that contraction of awareness also doesn't help. It partly, you could say, as we said before, it increases the sort of sense of how pervasive the pain is, that it's taking up the whole of consciousness, the whole of experience. There's also a way in which we could say that a smaller awareness, like it puts a pressure on something in a way, or it can put a pressure on something, just as a way that if we have a gas in a container and we squeeze that container, so we shrink the container, the pressure of the gas will increase. The intensity, the pressure in physics is the speed of the movement, the momentum that's related to the momentum, the kinetic energy of the movement. And so analogously, the pain increases when there's a contraction in the awareness. But there's something more fundamental than this muscular contraction or contraction of awareness. There's something more fundamental to the way that clinging, the degree of fabrication of vedna is dependent on clinging. More clinging, more vedna is fabricated. Certainly, it's highly obvious to most practitioners, even after they've practiced just a little bit of insight meditation, more clinging, more suffering. Now another level is more clinging, not just more fabrication of suffering, more fabrication of vedna itself. Okay, so there's that level of practice, and it's really important, and it's a really basic skill for everyone to develop. It may or may not, as I said, reveal this deeper level of understanding about dependent origination, the way clinging fabricates vedna, may or may not. But then there's a whole other level. And so, for example, there are practices such as the three characteristics as ways of looking. Again, all this is in seeing the freeze. But practicing the three characteristics in very specific ways, really engaging them as ways of looking. So those three, or actually any emptiness way of looking, again, many, many in seeing the freeze. So three characteristics are dukkha, and there's what I call dukkha method one, and dukkha method two, and in dukkha method two, there's different variations. Like I said, I'm not going into detail, because I've done this in so much detail elsewhere. You can find it certainly in seeing the freeze, and you can find recordings and talk about it. But there's many variations, and we can talk about welcoming practice, again, both with a narrow attention, with a spacious attention or awareness. We can talk about directing metta to phenomena, to dhammas. Many many practices here, again, can be done narrow and spacious attention. We can talk about emptiness practices such as seeing the whole and the parts of something, let's say a pain, a region of pain, contemplating the mutual dependent rising and mutual emptiness of the whole and the parts of the pain. We can talk about the practice of not one, not many. This pain is not one, not many, and that's a way of seeing its emptiness. Looking at it, looking at it, attending to the pain, feeling, sensing the pain, at the same time we have this very delicate, agile, sophisticated understanding, very lightly, very almost like in shorthand, very delicately in the way of looking, wrapped up in the way of looking. It's not one, not many, meaning it's empty. In that very beautiful, profound practice we can, again, feel the pain but be aware of the emptiness of any dualities or particularly the emptiness of the duality of pain and pleasure. What does that do? We can look at the pain and analyze it with the sevenfold reasoning or other reasonings. So many, many possibilities here, very, very powerful practices. What we're doing there, again, most of them can be done with a, not all of them actually, some of them can be done with a narrow attention, focused on the pain or with a wider attention. Many possibilities and many variations for each possibility in many cases. What we're doing here is we're engaging a way of looking, metatively, lightly, as I said the other day in the talk on emptiness and ways of looking, that has much less clinging in it, much, much less clinging in it. So you can see that in the Dukkha II method, it's actually deliberately getting a sense, somewhere rather, getting a sense of the clinging in the moment, any push pull, any aversion, any hanging on, any tension in the relationship with a phenomenon that one is attending to and relaxing that clinging. Some of them work obviously very directly with the clinging, some much more indirectly, or they're working with the Avijja and reducing the Avijja in the moment, in the way of looking. So I'm attending to this phenomenon, this pain, with some degree of less clinging, at some level, some aspect of clinging, and some degree and some aspect of Avijja has gone. And again, because of the map that Buddha gave of the links of dependent origination, less clinging, less fabrication. Less Avijja, also less fabrication. And as I said, the Ode Avijja also is actually just another mode of clinging. It's a subtle mode of clinging and is seen as such in my own terminology. But this is what we're doing, and this is what an insight way of looking is, basically. It's relating to attending to sensing something or other, any phenomenon whatsoever, through a lens that has, in some way or another, a little or a lot less clinging in it, a little or a lot less Avijja. And because of that, that phenomenon right now, right here, right now, in this moment that I'm still attending to it, is fabricated less. The intensity of the unpleasant vedna actually starts to decrease, and sometimes dramatically so. And we can talk about a kind of, again, hierarchy of potency of these kinds of practices in a way that's partly, well, there's a thread through seeing it freeze that traces that hierarchy. So this is the thing I said the other day, to look at something through the lens empty, understanding that it's fabricated is much more potent as a way of looking than just looking at it as anatta, which is usually more potent than, let's say, just impermanence. And looking at it through a lens of the awareness that knows it is anatta, is not me, not mine, is usually more potent than this pain is not me, not mine. Empty, it's empty of inherent existence, it's empty of having any phenomenal self, this pain, that's even more powerful, etc., etc. So there's a kind of hierarchy, and you can, in a way, seeing it freeze is kind of, let's say, not completely, but loosely organized in the progression of that hierarchy of potency, just because it's actually a hierarchy of progression of both meditative skill and also depth of understanding, understanding that comes from experience. As I said the other day, I can't look at something with a way of looking that understands it's empty until I have really understood for myself that it's empty. For example, because I've seen that it's fabricated, because I've looked at it with, say, the second dukkha method or the first dukkha method or anatta and seen that it fades, therefore it's fabricated, dependent on the way of looking. And that's seen so many times and felt, and the impact on the being felt so many times that understanding is consolidated, then that consolidated understanding can be engaged, can be used as a way of looking. I've moved to another level of practice there, another depth. So there's lots of these kinds of practices, these unfabricating ways of looking, these insight ways of looking, and there's lots of them, but there's also lots to them. So as I said, for example, take the dukkha method, what I call dukkha method number two, lots of variations. Or we just mentioned the anatta, the anatta, not me, not mine. We can regard the pain itself, the unpleasant vedna, as not me, not mine. But we can also attend to the unpleasant vedna, the pain, at the same time we're including an awareness of the awareness of that pain, including both, and then regard the awareness of the pain. Our awareness of it, regard that as anatta. Or for example, the usually completely unnoticed, so to speak, unconscious intention to pay attention. Whenever we pay attention to something, I don't just mean as a, oh right now I've really got to pay attention, or deliberately in meditation, I mean just paying attention to anything. Whenever we hear a sound, there's a movement of the attention there, or if we hear a sound, there's a movement of attention towards that object, and so that attention is something that needs an intention behind it. And that intention is almost always unconscious, we don't realize it, unless we're actually making an exercise and trying to pay attention, then we're really going to pay attention. But even then, we only realize usually a very gross level of that intention. But there's, in every moment of consciousness you could say, the mind is attending to something, it has to be. In any moment of experience, which means any moment of perception, which means any moment of appearance or phenomena, the mind is paying attention, and with that there is an intention to pay attention to that phenomena. Now we could, as we're attending to the pain, also include in our awareness the very, very subtle sense of the intention to pay attention. It's a very, very subtle moment to moment, almost throbbing movement, very, very subtle in the mind. And we could regard that intention to pay attention as anatta, as not me, not mine. Or we could regard our aversion, and notice there's some aversion to this pain, and what if I regard the aversion, pushing away, the subtle, just wanting to, even it's not, I'm talking about aversion, not at the level of the mind, saying, oh, this is terrible, I wish it would go away, just a subtle, energetic pushing, energetic trying to distance oneself. We could regard that aversion as anatta. We could adopt a way of looking where the actual object includes not just the pain, but also the sense of aversion to the pain, and regard the aversion as anatta, as not me, not mine. It's a more sophisticated way of looking. And the same with if we move to a level where we're engaging a way of looking that understands empty, empty, it's looking at things as empty. So there's all those possible objects, not just the unpleasant, not just the pain, but also the awareness of the pain is also empty, which again means more than it's not just me, it means more than it's not me, not mine. It's not just me, not mine, anatta. It's empty of phenomenal existence. That's a very, very deep level of practice and a very, very, even quite sophisticated awareness, understanding, excuse me, sophisticated understanding. So to be able to do that, but there, and again, with the intention to pay attention, with the aversion, the aversion, it has no inherent existence. The aversion is empty, etc. So there are many objects, it's as if what we could say is that, you know, pain is a dependent arising. Okay, we've talked about, we'll begin to see through these practice how pain is a dependent arising because it's dependent on the way of looking. And you start to see if I can really pay attention, engage some of these ways of looking, the pain just fades. It just disappears. It dissipates. It dissolves. Or at least it attenuates. We begin to understand the pain, the unpleasant vein is dependent on my way of looking. But it's also dependent on all these other factors. It's dependent on attention. It's dependent on my identifying with the awareness of it, all these factors, and many, many more. Actually pain itself is a dependent arising in that it is a constellation. If you like, it's many things threaded together, woven together. It's already a thicket of things. It's hard to separate out these things. But meditatively one can, let's say, separate them out enough. Ultimately they're not separable and that's one of the real deep understandings that emptiness teaches. But meditatively, practically, in our art, in our meditative art, it's possible to separate them out enough to isolate them, to work on ways of looking that target, that pinpoint, different twigs in this thicket, different thorns in this thicket, different threads in this tangle. And that starts doing something. But really pain is a constellation, we could say. And any or all of those elements within the constellation of what we call pain can be objects or an insight way of looking. We can practice, we can train our insight way of looking on those objects. So pain is a dependent arising fabricated by the whole constellation and it's also a dependent arising fabricated by unskillful ways of looking at the whole constellation. Unskillful most of them are just habitual and completely unconscious. You understand? So pain itself is dependent arising in terms of it's fabricated by all these other factors of attention and whatnot. But it's also dependent on ways of looking. It's a fabrication dependent on ways of looking at that whole constellation. Okay there's a huge area and I said I've gone into it in lots and lots of detail elsewhere so I'm just kind of listing it and unpacking a bit of the understanding right now. Third possibility for those of you who have developed Jhana practice to some degree. There's a quite lovely and also quite amazing possibility and way of practicing here. And actually offered it on this recent Jhana retreat at Gaya House and I think a lot of people were just quite amazed at what happened and the magic of it and that it would be possible and what it sort of suggested about the nature of things and the reality of things that we believe were just givens, just primary. Often times our understanding of buddha dhamma is that vedana is just a given. It's just what it is. This is what we're given. Unpleasant, vedana, pleasant, neither. It might vary from person to person. This person likes that sound. Another person doesn't like that sound and that might depend on history etc. But in the moment it's just a given. There's a whole other level of understanding which really understands that's actually not the case. Vedana is not a given. Vedana is a dependent arising, dependent on how we're looking at it in the moment, on the way of relating to it in the moment, the way of looking at it in the moment. So here, once one's developed a kind of enough familiarity or mastery at a certain level of jhana, wherever that is, first jhana, fourth jhana, whatever, then one can, if one is practising enough with that familiarity and there's enough skill with it, one can actually begin to take what I call the primary nimitta of that jhana. So for example, in the first jhana it would be pete, that's the dominant flavour of the first jhana and the thing that I'm giving most attention to. The primary perception. And if one's familiar enough with the, skilled enough with the first jhana, here's this area of pain in the body and one can just decide to see it, to feel it, to sense it as pete, which means bliss or ecstasy or rapture or certainly means pleasant feeling. So what was unpleasant, one just decides to see it as pleasant. Based on what? Based on my familiarity with that perception from my jhanic experience. And if one is skilled in the second jhana, one can feel, sense, see this area of pain in the body as happiness. It's no longer dukkha, it's no longer unpleasant, it has become pleasant and its very texture and vibration is happiness. Or again through the different jhanas, a kind of luminous stillness it can become. It's kind of not even pleasant anymore, it's kind of very subtly pleasant really, but technically speaking it's a kind of neither pleasant or unpleasant, actually it's subtly pleasantness. So this area of pain has just now become an area of luminous stillness, there's no pain there. And the fifth jhana has just become empty space. Or it's become consciousness if I take the primary nimitta from the sixth jhana, it's become nothingness etc. So again this might sound completely unbelievable, but as I said many people who had never even heard of this possibility before coming on retreat at Gai house just over three weeks duration of retreat began playing with this when I suggested it and found wow, wow this is really possible. Where you could say colouring the perception of an air, where changing the perception of an air, there's a kind of magic. Just as there will be if one really develops the insight ways of looking practice there will be a sense of wow, this dependent origination business is magic. There's something, this unfabricating, fabricating, dependent on the way of looking at the moment, it's really magic. Feels like magic. And our ability to do this, to take let's say an area of pain in the body and to just have the intention of feeling it as pleasure, as sukha or as piti or whatever it is, or as nothingness. Our ability to do that strongly implies, there's only one conclusion, it's empty. It doesn't exist this pain as a given, as this unpleasant baden, as a given, as a thing that's a kind of absolute reality independent of the way of looking. It doesn't exist only from its own side so to speak. Doesn't have inherent existence. So when we practice this way, let's say we develop jhanas and do that, or let's say the insight ways of looking and that happens, we understand it's empty, it's a dependent arising but dependent on the present. Not just dependent on the past, yes this pain is dependent on my injury, yes this pain is dependent on my illness, whatever it is, yes this pain is dependent on sitting hours and hours and hours and the body getting stiff or whatever. It's a dependent arising, dependent on the way of looking in the moment as well. We understand something, we have that insight and we get that and we get that it's empty, it's a dependent arising and it's malleable, it's a fabrication dependent on the way of looking and it's malleable. It's not a solid fixed thing, not just that it's impermanent and not fixed in that way, not solid in that way, it's actually malleable. Our way of looking shapes it, can shape it, it does shape it and with development of our own skill and meditation it can shape it, it can shape it from pain to pleasure and all different flavours of pleasure in fact. Because that deep nothingness is also in a strange kind of mystical way a kind of pleasure. Even in it's kind of being neither pleasant or unpleasant it's actually a kind of pleasure. The Buddha talks sometimes he says sometimes I teach three kinds of Aedna, pleasant, unpleasant, neither pleasant or unpleasant, other times I teach just pleasant and unpleasant. Anyway, that's in a way the two kinds of Aedna model is a more subtle teaching. So seeing this in practice, feeling it in practice, doing it in practice and feeling sensing the results first hand, that area of pain there. It's not that okay I'll just go and pay attention to where it feels good, I mean that's a skillful thing to do as we explain on the Janaratri as well. But I'm looking at that pain there and that pain transforms, it is malleable, it's transformed through adopting a different way of looking at it. So we understand that and the very understanding of the emptiness, the dependent origination, the fabricated nature and the malleability of Vedana, of perception in this case of pain implies the possibility, it strengthens and adds to our sense that this is possible, that perception is malleable, that Vedana is malleable. So we do it, we understand the emptiness, the dependent origination, the malleability and that understanding of the emptiness, the dependent origination, the malleability actually shows up our sense of the possibility and actually increases our skill. It's somehow our very knowing of that, technically our very knowing of the emptiness, the dependent origination, the malleability of it is when we have that knowing there's less Avija because there's less Avija, the pain is actually more malleable because it's Avija which fabricates, the pain of fabricates the kind of solidity. So actually when we're engaging, when we're confident and we're approaching something with a way of looking at nose that it's malleable, it actually becomes more malleable. But that knowledge of malleability needs to be first dependent on our experience as before. So it might be through these practices, through the Jain practices that there's no, certainly there's no unpleasantness there but it may be that we replace it with pleasure, it may be that it's replaced with a very deep fading and unfabricating of the Vedana. For example in some of those when we play with perception in a way that we're just seeing consciousness there or we're just seeing nothingness there, there's a very deep fading, a very deep unfabricating of the Vedana. It is not yet a complete unfabricating, it's not a complete cessation of perception and Vedana but it's very deep, it's gone beyond the Vedana of pleasure, perception of pleasure. So these again, they might sound just unreachable but they're really, really not. I'm going through quite quickly because I've talked and written elsewhere again. There's a fourth possibility or fourth basket of possibilities, level of possibilities. So it's possible to, once one has developed in some of these emptiness ways of looking and insight ways of looking, it's actually possible to look at the pain, to sense a pain. You can listen and see how much of this will apply to all kinds of other phenomena, not just physical pain, maybe mental, maybe other things as well. So there's much more broader lessons here as well, broader relevance. But once one has really developed some of the art and skill there in these emptiness ways of looking, one can engage in an emptiness way of looking. Let's say I'm looking at something empty and I understand it means fabricated or just a perception or empty of having inherent existence because I've done the sevenfold reasoning before and I've seen it many times that it can't have inherent existence. So I'm engaging one of these deep emptiness practices but it's as if I'm not completely putting my foot down on the insight pedal, so to speak. So in my way of looking there's not the full amount of the kind of tincture of the insight of emptiness. I'm putting in maybe half amount or in the sort of current analogy, I'm pressing on the gas, on the accelerator, but not completely. I've got a whole, there's a whole range there of how much I can kind of lean on the knowing of emptiness within the way of looking in any moment. Again, it might sound outrageously sophisticated and impossible, it's really not. It just takes practice but practicing in a certain way, it won't come about just because I've spent ten thousand hours on a cushion trying to be mindful. I have to practice in certain ways that this kind of level of art is developed and that it builds up stage by stage. So what happens in this one is I am engaging a deep emptiness way of looking but I'm playing with the kind of intensity of the emphasis on emptiness within that way of looking. How much I'm leaning so to speak on that insight of emptiness, how much I'm pressing on that pedal, how many drops of this tincture of insight are in the way of looking. And then there's some fading but not a complete fading. Because if I really, if I've developed those practices, those insight ways of looking particularly emptiness ways of looking, then when I attend to a pain and I'm looking at it as empty, empty, and I've consolidated that practice, I've developed it, that pain will fade, it will disappear. Here I'm actually looking at it as empty but not allowing it to completely fade. You think, well why would you do that? Why would you bother to do that if you can have it absolutely completely fade? So this, I think, is a very interesting question. And there's two answers we could give. The first one is what I would consider the more important one. And I'll state the answer as a question actually. So here's the question that we started with. Why would you want to only partially fade some pain when you could completely fade it? There's dukka, it's unpleasant. Why would you not just want to fade it completely? And the question, oh sorry, the answer in the form of a question, I would put like this. What is most sacred? What is most sacred? That's the answer. That's the answer to this question why. Why I might only want to partially fade it at times. Now this question, what is most sacred, is actually a question only for those practitioners who know through their own experience in meditation, through their own repeated experience in meditation, and their understanding, who know this deep complete fading of things. Who know the unfabricated, who know cessation, and the implications of deep fading, implying that the total emptiness of any phenomenal reality, any experience, any appearance, any perception, any vedna. Excuse me. So this answer that I'm going to give probably, well before we go on to soul making at least, we'll just talk in terms of classical Buddha dham, this answer only really will make sense to people who know about very deep fading and know personally through their experience, through having developed the practices that I've just talked about, particular insight ways of looking. It has to be based on the mindfulness etc. The answer is a question, what is most sacred? If you know and you've gone as far as that complete cessation, complete deep fading, unreached, unfabricated, recognized, fabricated, and therefore illusory nature of all phenomenal reality, then you're at a point when there is likely to be a hierarchy of sacredness. Remember reality is an illusion, it's a fabrication, which has this connotation of illusion and lie, as does the word concoction, both in translations of Sankara. In contrast to which the unfabricated, the complete fading of all perception and all vedana is real, is true, is because it's unfabricated, it's not that dependent arising it seems. So one is probably at that point leaning or looking at the world as the lower tier, if you like, in a hierarchy, the fabricated, in contrast to the unfabricated, and the unfabricated is the true and the holy, if you like, the sacred. But as I've explained elsewhere, we can actually then not, we cannot stop at that point, we can go deeper in our exploration of fabrication and emptiness. I'm not going to explain it here again, it's in saying freeze and in, I think it's in that talk, it's a two-part talk approaching the Dharma, I think it's called Other Places as well. We begin to see the emptiness of fabrication, and emptiness of the process of fabrication and the emptiness of time, which fabrication is a process in time, the emptiness of fabrications, the emptiness of the process of fabrication, the emptiness of time. And all that, as we go deeper then, we start to realize the emptiness of the unfabricated, which exists in a kind of dualistic opposition with the fabricated, with the fabricated is empty, is not really a fabricated, then the unfabricated too, as a dualistic contrast, kind of is collapsed, not as an experience, but as a duality, it's collapsed, there is no hierarchy, and we come to a deeper level of realization, deeper even than realizing the unfabricated through the cessation, total unfabricating of the phenomenal world of perception of Aedna. We come to a deeper realization that's non-dualistic, and what opens up for us then is a sense of a world of empty, divine and magical appearances. They're already magical to see that they're dependent on the way of looking, dependent on fabricating in the moment. But magical at a whole other level, when you also realize that fabrication too is not a real thing, and a time in which things could be fabricated is not a real thing, the whole, you're at the edge of the level of what even magical might possibly mean, and now emptiness starts to have a bigger meaning than fabrication. At first they were a little bit synonymous if you follow the ways of looking approach, now emptiness means more than fabrication. And because there's no hierarchy of holiness, of sacredness, divinity everywhere, holiness, sacredness everywhere, the world of phenomena becomes a world of empty, magical and divine appearances. But that, here's where language gets so tricky because someone could hear something like that, and perhaps they only know a level, still a very lovely level of practice, but perhaps they only know that level of practice that I call the vastness of awareness, where there's a very spacious, kind of effortless seeming awareness, and phenomena arise and pass within that vast awareness, within that space, spacious awareness, and they seem very insubstantial, these phenomena, just diaphanous, see-through them, they're of the nature, of the substance, of the awareness. Some people call that the opening to the nature of mind, or the realization of the nature of mind, etc. To someone just familiar with that level of practice could say, yes, yes, it's a world of empty, magical and divine appearances, I know exactly what you're talking about, but no, no, no, no, this is really, really important. I'm talking about a whole other level. So beautiful as that, those openings and those perceptions are at the level of what I call the vastness of awareness, really, really important stage from a lot of practitioners, maybe the majority of insight meditation practitioners. We're talking now about a whole other level. As I said, this is only for people who've gone beyond that to the total fading and cessation, to the complete unfabricated, beyond any sense of space, any sense of awareness in that sense of vastness of awareness, any sense of phenomena arising, any sense of all of that, any sense of time, any sense of the present moment, understood the implications of that and then gone beyond even that. So we're talking really about several quite significant stages further than this vastness of awareness of what some people call the nature of mind, the realization of practice of the nature of mind, nature of awareness. So when I use, this is where the same words can be understood or used at very different levels. So here I'm going to say a world of empty, magical and divine appearances. It's all three of those words, empty, magical and divine, have just very different levels of connotation. They're imbued with a very different level of understanding, really stretched further there. So the question I asked as an answer in response to the question, why would you only want to half fade when you can fully fade on pain and unpleasantness is what is most sacred? And if this sense of non-dualistic world of empty, magical and divine appearances, that pain, that half faded pain, so will attenuate a little bit, can't help attenuate some, is that pain is empty, magical and divine. And I've not just gotten rid of pain, I've maybe attenuated it somewhat, but it's become empty, magical and divine. And if I care about sacredness, and if sacredness is part of what I want, or let's say, it's not, let's say at least that, it's not that all I ever want is to get rid of my pain, all I ever want is a reduction in dukkha, then this level actually becomes very important. And this ability to, based on my understanding of this non-duality between fabricate and non-fabricate, which is based on my understanding of the emptiness of fabricated, unfabricated fabrications, time, process of fabricating, which is based on my understanding of fabrication in the first place, which is based on my practice of way of looking, then that actually becomes the one that opens me in this moment to a beautiful sense of sacredness, deep, profound, magical, and that touches me deeply. Still got some pain there in that moment, but there's a whole different sense of the pain, self and existence, if I care about sacredness. So that I think is, for me, the most important answer to the question, why would I only want to incomplete fade when this, you know, only half fading when I could actually fade the pain completely? I would say that's the most important answer. But historically there's a very related answer, but it has to do with buddholaji, the notion of what a buddha is. And I'm only going to allude to this. I may or may not come back to it in the context of another talk at some future time, but there's a difference between a, there's quite a big difference between the notion, the Theravada notion of what a buddha is and what a buddha mind is and does, and a Mahayana notion of what a buddha is and what a buddha mind is and does. And all of the buddholaji's between Theravada and Mahayana are actually quite different. And in the Mahayana teachings, it said, I think I mentioned this the other day in a talk at Guy House, I'm pretty sure, it said only a buddha can look at a phenomenon and thoroughly look at it knowing its emptiness without it completely fading. Only the non-dual, it's called nosis, wisdom awareness, only the non-dual wisdom awareness or jnana, Pali and Sanskrit, only the non-dual jnana of a buddha is capable of fully knowing the emptiness of appearances, fully knowing in that moment the emptiness of appearances at the same time as keeping those appearances from fading. So that's a kind of very basic tenet in Mahayana teachings. It's in Mahayana Sutra Lankara and the Mahayana Sangaraha, a very core text of Mahayana teaching. Tsongkhapa, great Tibetan teacher, founder of the Gelug school reiterates it in his Illumination of Thought commentary on a basic text of Chandrakirti centuries earlier. Mipham Rinpoche comes back to it from a different strata, nimma, master. So it's in the different streams of the Tibetan lineages as well. Not a lot of people know it though, not a lot of people know that teaching or know just quite the import and the significance of that teaching in the Mahayana for Mahayana philosophy. So it has to do with buddhology, I'm not going to go into this too much, and what is the aim of practice? So bodhisattva is someone who's aiming or has vowed to become a buddha. But in the Mahayana, a buddha is not someone who is then born like the story of Siddhartha and becomes a buddha, teaches for a while and then dies and just disappears because they're not reborn anymore like an arahant. In the Mahayana version or buddhology, a buddha is someone who is able to be fully awakened, fully enlightened. It means no more avijaya at all, but they can be in the world, they are reborn so to speak or at least in most of the Mahayana buddholities, an emanation of them appears in the world. The rupakaya, the three bodies of a buddha, the rupakaya, the emanation of the buddha. So there's all kinds of arcane sounding and convoluted seeming and sophisticated Mahayana teachings that actually come back or are rooted in this basic problem. How is it that if I don't have any avijaya in any moment that I perceive anything? Because for a normal human being, as the Mahayana's sangra says and those Mahayana texts, for a normal human being, when I look at something, when I engage a way of looking that has no avijaya in it, then that phenomenon fades. There's no perception of that phenomenon. There's less avijaya, therefore, well there's no avijaya, therefore no perception. So the question is how can a buddha then be reborn into the world of perception? How can they be in the world or at least an emanation of them being in the world and help, continue to help instead of just reaching enlightenment, teaching for a few years and then not being reborn and therefore not being of help? So with the full weight and force of their complete prajnaya wisdom, insight and ejniana, ejnyosas, which means no avijaya and with no unskillful sankaras, no karma of subtle craving or clinging. How can a buddha be reborn without avijaya and without any sankaras, unskillful sankaras, be reborn so that they can be in the world, which means that they have to perceive, so that they can help. To help you have to perceive, which means there needs to be a world, there needs to be perception of a world. So some birds, an arahant is totally liberated but has removed their avijaya completely but they still have a kind of momentum of sankaras, karmic momentum of sankaras that's only exhausted when the arahant dies. So it's a bit like a car been running and then runs out of petrol and it's momentum, even that's run out of petrol, it's run out of the avijaya that would keep it going, it's still going to go for a while until the conditions are such that the friction of the road or whatever or hill makes it stop. So that's one of the models for how an arahant is in the world, their continued existence until they die is just propelled by old karma, the stream of sankaras coming from past karma. And then at death that's exhausted and they never get reborn because there's no more avijaya and the stream of sankaras is exhausted. But if you're not reborn then you can't help and if you don't perceive, so reborn is the world or the world of perception is reborn, I can't help so I can't have infinite compassion. So the bodhisattva in mayana teaching has a different aim, they're aiming to be in the world with that full prasana, full jnana which means no avijaya etc and they need to perceive at the same time. Anyway this has spawned all kinds of complicated conundra and philosophies and things in the world but very few people know the roots of some of these teachings or know it's like it's as if the mayana were given a kind of riddle to solve and did so very very I think beautifully and creatively and variously in terms of how they figured that out. What Vajrayana practice is then is essentially a mimicking of the Buddha mind. So if you read tantra and Vajrayana this seeing of divinities and seeing appearances as divinities, so if you read tantric text a lot of them are about seeing elements erytheia, fire and water as divinities etc. Seeing appearances of divine is a sort of stock Vajrayana phrase. When one practices the different Vajrayana practices one can actually conceive of them as what we're really doing is mimicking a Buddha's mind and the hope is that in mimicking a Buddha's mind we eventually become just like a Buddha, just through the habit of mimicking. What we're mimicking is that ability to fully know the emptiness of something at the same time as sustaining the appearances without them fading. Only the non dual jnana, wisdom awareness of a Buddha, mayana Buddha is able to fully know the emptiness of appearances without those appearances fading. All the rest of us need to either we're leaning on the emptiness inside pedal fully in which case the appearance that we're looking at will fade, will disappear, the perception won't get fabricated or we have to back off that pedal and let the appearance reconstitute. So when we're playing with this incomplete fade you're actually playing with a lightly touching, lightly including, lightly emphasizing the emptiness inside within the way of looking so that it doesn't completely fade and in that way you're mimicking the Buddha mind, the Buddha perception. And as I explained earlier then it's possible that one starts to perceive in that space, in that middle ground there, dependent on all the insight and art of practice from before, starts to be able to perceive all things as bliss, primordial cosmic divine bliss not just as pity for example. So yes pleasant, yes divine but blessed. The bliss here means something else in the Vajrayana teachings. The nature of all things is bliss. It's obsessed. Not just that they're all pleasant but they're divine and blessed. So you know Zogchen is a teaching that I think has said to have nine levels within it, nine levels of teaching but I don't know how often this kind of thing gets included so that it will be very understandable or very common to hear Zogchen teachings or practice them or read about them and actually just understand them all at the most only at that other level that we were talking about before in terms of the vastness of awareness and so-called nature of mind. And a lot of the words can be used at different levels, different levels of understandings and different levels of the art of practice, divine, magical appearances, bliss, insubstant, you know whatever it is. Empty even. So there's a lot here but I'm not going to say more about it now. What I'm going to say is basically through the development of both our insight and our meditative art, this way of practicing I'm talking about now where there's this incomplete fading, deliberate incomplete fading. Through the gradual development of our insight into emptiness and our meditative art we are kind of given or is open for us both the license and the ability to fabricate for the sake of more sacredness, for the sake of being touched by a sense of sacredness, of divinity, of beauty, for the sake of opening to that and immersing oneself in there, being in there, for the sake of sacredness and beauty and a whole other level of what we might call healing. So there's physical healing obviously, there's the kind of fading of a pain and having some relief and then this kind of divine contextualizing or this transubstantiation of the pain into something magical, empty and divine and a cosmos that's magical, empty and divine, a cosmos of appearances that are magical, empty and divine. That constitutes a whole other level of healing. But the license there is given, what I call the license to fabricate for that purpose and in that way is based on, in other words, we have the understanding that this is a deeper insight, actually not as deeper than going all the way, just going all the way into the unfabricated, complete unfabricating, but it's only a deeper insight if we have experienced and understood that deeper or complete fading, that complete unfabricating, the unfabricated. Do you understand? If I haven't understood then only a relative insubstantializing of pain or the world of phenomena is not necessarily the deeper insight. But if I have gone all the way and then gone beyond that, gone all the way to unfabricated and then gone beyond that, then I understand that this partial fading, this kind of middle region, empty yet appearing, I understand that that embodies, if you like, manifests the deeper insight. But only if I've gone in terms of my fading experience understanding deeper. Okay, so then there's all those four groups of practices there, I suppose, the mindfulness in a couple of different ways, the insight ways of looking, the playing with perception with jhanic qualities, the deep emptiness ways of looking but without the complete fading towards the sacredness. There's also a whole set of practices that usually get called exchanging self and other, and really exchanging the happiness of self and other. So this, I won't say too much about that, but again it's in seeing that freeze, there's a section on that with, by that point, what will be, again, it depends, what's possible here in this set of practices of exchanging self and other depends a lot on what one has developed in previous insight ways of looking, practices and understandings of emptiness and fabrication, all that. But basically, here's this pain, here's this dukkha, and this applies just as well to mental dukkha or hindrances, I think I threw this out in the jhana retreat or depression or whatever it is, here's this dukkha, and I start to relate to it in a very different way. I say, let I take on, I accept, I want this dukkha now. While I'm actually in contact with, I'm paying attention to it, this dukkha, here, now, this experience, I take that on so that someone somewhere else, someone I will never know, never ever meet, I take it from them to relieve them of their burden of dukkha. So it's a kind of magical thinking. Or one can also do the opposite with one's happiness, and actually, when one experiences happiness or even just imagines experiencing some kind of happiness, some specific experience of happiness, specific experience of dukkha, and actually with the happiness, one gives that away, one gives it to someone else in meditation. So again, we're talking about not a philosophy or a sort of way of living, but a meditative way of looking, which again means it's light, it's delicate, it's agile, it's subtle, and it's in contact with this experience. If we're talking about physical pain, it's in contact with the physical pain and then looking at it in a certain way. So I'm taking it on in a way I'm welcoming it, in that way it's very related, of course, to the welcoming practice or the certain version of dukkha method too. A very, very beautiful practice connects us with others and the heart and beautiful intention and love and compassion. Also magical, so many possibilities here, so many possibilities. Because when I decide to take on this suffering, this experience of the suffering right now, in that taking on, I'm also, and this is why it's related to dukkha method too, I'm actually lessening my normal habitual compulsive aversion, pushing away. I'm relaxing that aversion. And that actually, one of the things it does is it starts attenuating because there's less aversion, there's less clinging, because there's less clinging, there's less fabricating of the unpleasant. So it actually makes it easier to bear. Then if I can, again, linger in that beautiful space where the heart is connected, the pain is eased somewhat, I'm taking it on for others, so I'm connected with others, with the compassion, with the beautiful intention, with the more sacrificial intention, and the attention to the unpleasant vedna, which is attenuating because I've changed my relationship to them in the moment. One can also mix it with emptiness, because as I do that, they get unfabricated more. Maybe that's my first taste of unfabricating and I start to realise, oh, they're empty. Or maybe I've understood they're empty from other insight ways of looking. And then I can play with these empty sensations, this empty unpleasantness. I take it on. Knowing it's empty, it's easier to take it on for your sake, etc. There's so many variants here and possibilities and such a beautiful realm of practices, group of practices, can be really creative. And again, doing this can really open up the malleability of perception and the sense of divinity of perception, mixing love with emptiness and again, in a way, taking us towards the Buddha mind or mimicking the Buddha mind. So if you like, towards more tantric, some of the tantric practices, Vajrayana practices. A lot of possibilities here, really beautiful, really creative, really, really worth playing with. Sometimes of course what happens, you know, very understandably, very normally when there's dukkha, mental or physical, is that we do the self-contracts around it. And then the self gets kind of hard and woven around the pain, mental or physical. And here we're partly just really opening up the sense of self, opening up that sense of contraction. And that's part of what's happening there. So there's a lot of possibilities that can be very creative, can use your imagination a lot. And it does open up a lot of possibilities that are tantric or quasi-tantric or Vajrayana-like, etc. But there's also of course the possibility of imaginal practices here in this whole realm with hands, as I mentioned at the beginning. And you know, one possibility might be a little bit similar to the exchanging self and other, you know, there's a relationship because it uses imagination, it also uses the self. So where there's an imaginal relationship with an object pain, it will start to involve the sense of self. And the soul-making, dynamically, imagine will spread to include the sense of self. So we can actually deliberately include the sense of self from the beginning. I want to go into this a little bit. So for example, here's this pain, here's this dukkha, here's this illness, here's whatever it is. And one can have some kind of image of it as a sacrifice, or oneself as a sacrifice, as a sacrificial victim, if you like. Now that may be, you know, a fully blown sort of image of a sacrifice and oneself in that or whatever. It could be much, much more subtle than that. But in some way, the pain and the suffering and the self are woven into an image of sacrifice. So it might be a kind of very, you know, detailed, prominent image of being a sacrificial victim and in relationship to pain. Or it might be that the whole notion of sacrifice and sacrificial victim remains kind of vague. It's not so filled out as an image. It's just a kind of a potent idea. So that rather than paying a lot of attention to an actual image, there's this thing going on where this, you know, sacrificial victim is, I don't know, burnt on the altar or whatever it is. It's actually just the notion, again, like a tincture, the idea of a sacrificial victim, for example. But it remains vague. It might be just a kind of archetypal idea or it might be, and that's in the background, what's more in the pain is what's, excuse me, very tired, that's in the background. What's more in the foreground is the pain, etc. And the image, so to speak, is functioning more as an ideational image background or a sense of a vague archetype. Or it might be through a very specific archetype, and the obvious one is Christ, you know. And maybe there's an identification, for example, with Christ's passion, Christ on the cross, etc. And again, that could be that the image of Christ comes very much to the foreground and the pain is still there, etc. But the image of Christ and the sense of identification comes more to the foreground. Or the other way, it's just in the background, it's the archetypal idea and sense and resonances and soul beauty of the archetype of Christ and identification with that. That's in the background, and what's in the foreground is myself, my particulars, this experience, but that has become imaginal, partly it's the image of it is sustained by the background archetype. And again, we talked about this word sacrifice just the other day, very briefly, but the etymology here is to make sacred. Fice, faccia, in Latin, is to make sacred, to make something sacred. So again, I'm not talking about Hollywood meanings of the word sacrifice, where there's strange rituals on altars with blood and weird stuff that we don't understand. It might be that, but the question as always with soul making practices, is it soul making? What's needed here? What degree of image? What degree of image in the background? What kind of image? It might be very, very subtle. It might be kind of dramatic and gory, or it might be very, very subtle. But the question is, right now, what's soul making? So careful not to buy into a sort of gory Hollywood incomprehensible understanding of the word sacrifice. But in including the self in what's happening, and maybe this imaginal notion or an image sense of sacrifice, sacrificial victim, then the whole thing can become imaginal. The element of the imaginal can ignite, the divinity, the beauty, etc. And it starts to really include the person and my particulars, and maybe even the sense of the necessity of this suffering, the necessity of this sacrifice, the necessity of this dukkha to the divine. I'll come back to that. So actually before I come back to it, just to say a few things about all this. So any Dharma practice in the sort of, any Dharma practice should bring about a reduction of pain in the here and now, in the present. So even something like doing matter for other beings, or compassion, or whatever it is, any Dharma practice should bring about a reduction of pain. Even if that's not what one's aiming for, even if one isn't trying not to even pay much attention to the pain, or if one is, or if one can't help including it in the attention, but any Dharma practice should bring a reduction in pain to some degree. Why? Because any Dharma practice, all Dharma practices, even practices like matter or whatever, are effectively reductions in the moment of clinging. So reducing clinging, again, there's a reduction of fabrication, the reduction of fabrication, also the pain gets fabricated less, the unpleasant vedna gets fabricated less. So any Dharma practice should bring a reduction in pain right now, not because I'm distracting myself because I'm paying attention to my metaphrases or whatever. So should bring some degree of reduction in pain, even if it's just a little bit in the here and now, not because of one's distracting oneself through practice, through trying to do some practice, but actually because there's less clinging, right? That's the understanding of dependent arising. But more importantly, I think, again, what's the point here? What's the point? So the Buddha, you know, some people say, well, the Buddha talked about meditation, particularly Jhana, but actually all meditation, as pleasant abiding in the here and now, and that being one of the reasons to practice meditation, that one's actually being able to abide, to be, to dwell in a pleasant state in the here and now, pleasant abiding in the here and now is one of the reasons for meditation, for developing meditation. But the other reason, the Buddha gave, of course, is for the development of insight and the ending of the fetters, the ending of the affluence, liberation, nibbana. So that obviously we regard meditation as a process leading, you know, developing that insight so that there is at some point liberation. This first reason that he gave, pleasant abiding in the here and now, is often not so much emphasized in contemporary teachings, but it's a reason he gave, this is why we practice meditation, for pleasant abiding in the here and now. In other words, can I abide pain free, but also to develop insight, and that second reason, the development of insight, is actually the main point. Or rather it's more important than pleasant abiding in the here and now. Sometimes people say, well, you know, this can't be right, what you said about fabrication and all that business about emptiness and pain disappearing and fading and not being fabricated, because the Buddha suffered from back pain. So you're telling me that it's possible of not fabricating physical pain, but the Buddha, if the Buddha had back pain, then what? But there's such a way the Buddha says he can be without his back pain as an old man and when he enters certain states of meditation, very deep, unfabricated, and then the pain disappears, it's unfabricated. When he moves about the world, this is right at the beginning, when he moves around the world, in the world, and he's interacting and it's outside of that degree of sort of meditative art, deliberate meditative art and attention, the pain was experienced again, was refabricated again. What's more important here though is that the point of these teachings, the main point of these teachings about fabricating and emptiness and learning to unfabricate is not, or at least it's not to live free of pain, to live a life that just isn't touched by pain because one has learned these tricks so that one never has to experience pain anymore. This pleasant abiding is a secondary level of reason. It's important, it's a relief, we need to have some relief, we need to have that release from Dukkha as much as is possible for us, but the primary reason is not to live free of pain. Rather, it's that in the seeing the dependent unfabricating and therefore the emptiness of pain, there's a much more general sense and profound sense of freedom in relation to existence that emerges for a human being. I see, because I see the emptiness of things, not just pain, emptiness of everything, a much broader, deeper and more general sense of freedom in relation to the whole of existence emerges. That's more important, the insight is more important and that sense of existence changes and this sense of emptiness of all things and that has a bearing on my whole life, it influences my relationship with the whole of my life. Painful of the pleasant, not birth, death, how long my life is, how short my life is, how I feel about all that depends on this level of insight, it changes this level of insight into emptiness, it changes my whole sense of things. What I would say, even that is even more important, more primary than that, is not just this change sense of freedom, of liberation in relationship to the whole of my life and my death. Even more important, and I'd say even more primary, is that that seeing of the emptiness of things deepens and opens a sense of the sacredness and mystery of all things as well, a really deep emptiness, as we talked about the other day, and actually I talked about it on the genre retreat as well. It opens and a little bit today in this talk opens up and deepens a sense of sacredness and to me that's, if you like, the most primary point. Second is this profound and widespread sense of liberation in relation to my whole life and death. And then third is the very gift we're very grateful for, the possibility of pleasant abiding in the here and now, relief from pain. To me they have a hierarchy there, which I think I mentioned also in one of those emptiness seminars in response to a question. So but also in soul making practice that again translates as, you know, some of these soul making practices, and I'll describe one in a minute, or like what I alluded to with the kind of playing with the idea of sacrifice, they will attenuate, they will reduce the sense of unpleasantness, the amount of pain, the intensity of pain in the moment, but still that's not the point. Soul making is the point when we're doing soul making practice. So all this of course is related in Dharma, what I said about that, to what I said about that middle space of sort of half fading, that region of the spectrum of fabrication, spectrum of fading. It's also related to the exchange itself and other days. In those practices there is a sacredness, a beauty, a divinity that we open up to. But then when we come to soul making practice, you know, soul making is the point of soul making practice, this is the primary point, and yes, secondarily we can often experience, you know, dissolving of suffering, relief from suffering, relief from dukkha, but the primary point of soul making practice is soul making. I remember recently I heard that old gospel song, old happy days, and I was listening to it, I hadn't heard it for yonks and yonks and yonks, and I realised listening to it that I had been for many years, had, I didn't really know the lyrics, and I had thought that vaguely in the back of my mind that the lyrics were not, the actual lyrics are, oh happy days when Jesus washed my sins away. And obviously the version I must have heard yonks ago was, oh happy days when Jesus washed walked, and then I couldn't really hear what the rest of it says, so not washed but walked. And so the song was kind of, in existing in my mind with the wrong lyrics, but I much preferred the old version, not oh happy days when Jesus washed my sins away, but just oh happy days when Jesus walked. That touched me, it touched my soul much more. In other words, there was an image wrapped up in just of Jesus walking, maybe with some of his disciples, and the image was not Jesus Christ with trumpets blaring and triumphant glory and little pink fat cherubs floating around and gallons of white light gushing down from the heavens, it wasn't that. It was not even that distinct as an image, but it was in a way very ordinary looking, just Jesus as a young man walking, perhaps, some of his disciples and other people around just walking, that was it. But captured in that image of Jesus walking was stuff that I can't put into words, just Jesus, his mercy, the mystery, the beauty, the divinity, the humility, the tenderness, the love, the compassion. So if I think when Jesus washed my sins away, it's almost like oh happy days, happy because my sins are washed away, and there's a release, you know, it's something for the self's process. The image that I had with my wrong lyrics was just Jesus walking, there was kind of nothing for the self's process in there, it was just the imaginal beauty of that. As I said, it was even like a really, really subtle vague image, but moved me so much more than something that would be, because I'm happy because he washed my sins away so that whatever, so I go to heaven or I feel pure or whatever. The gift and the grace of in the image there is not in washing my sins away, is not in being saved, amazing grace, etc. Save a poor wretch like me. The gift and the grace in this sense was more, much more mysteriously and subtly and all the more powerfully for just how mysteriously and subtly and quietly it was woven in just to the image of Jesus in that very earthy, humble, but divine way with all that sort of beauty there. So, you know, what's important? What's important in our Dharma practice? Of course you have to decide that, what's important for you. I'm just sharing for me if I put these things in hierarchy. When in deep emptiness understanding the most important thing is the sacredness. It all comes, the freedom comes, the pleasant abiding comes, of course, but if I had to put them in a hierarchy of what the point of all this is, I would put the sacredness on the top, even above the freedom. And in soul making practice, it's the sacredness too and the soul making, basically. So just to fill out a little bit of an example of, from myself, a few months ago, I've been in quite a lot of pain for the last few months in different ways from, I guess, from cancer. So I was meditating and was in quite a lot of pain. And I just want to describe one possibility, just to get a little bit of a sense and hopefully it amplifies and illustrates in a helpful way. So first we're sitting in the meditation. Lots of possibilities. Could have done all those emptiness things or the giant thing, whatever, but at that point was more inclining towards seeing what was possible in terms of soul making practice, in terms of sensing the soul. So that very intention invites and demands a certain, what we might call the poise of soul making, which means I need to be there with my energy body awareness. I need to be there with that open and filled with that kind of sensitivity. I need to be there also with a kind of receptivity and opportunism even around the sense of soulfulness. So that's part of the soul making poise. Just part of that is also confidence, that it's possible that something here can be sensed with soul. Soul making is possible in relationship to this dukkha. So there's energy body awareness, this receptivity to the sense of soulfulness, this kind of little bit of opportunism, also dependent on a kind of quiet background confidence, which is partly based on experience or it might need to be, it might need to just inject a little bit of trust. There's also humility in the poise. So here's a very challenging situation, dying of cancer, pain coming in often baffling ways and quite intense ways for long periods of time. Humility in relation to that situation, but also humility in relation to soul. So that's part of what we might call the poise of soul making, the sort of space in which soul making, the possibility of soul making are supported or pride, we're ready for that. Also the knowledge that image or sensing the soul is a way of looking. It's something that I need to engage. I'm not going to just be given it. I need to make sure that I take care of the elements, take care of looking in certain ways, the way of looking, etc. Part of the poise also might be the soul making poise, but just slightly less fabricating. So that's one of the elements in the imaginary. So just slightly less fabricating. And also the fullness of intention. The intention is the soul making. Not just relief of dukkha, not just whatever else it might be. Also within this what we might call poise, what I've called other times the kind of crucible, I need to feel both the painful, difficult or uncomfortable sensation. So I can't draw away from them. They have to be included. I need to feel them, feel the dukkha of that. I need also to feel the emotions initially as emotions. There needs to be some pathos there, some as dukkha. The emotions that go with this pain that I didn't understand what could help it, even physically I was trying to stretch, or is it my back, or is it this, or that. There's a lot of confusion and a lot of work and time and energy going into trying to figure it out. So there's all kinds of emotional strands and aspects within a kind of heart pathos. So there's the physical dukkha and then there's the emotions. At first I need to actually feel those emotions as emotions, feel the dukkha there and some compassion for it. Compassion in the mix. Some amount of, really it was just spontaneous compassion that was there. This is all part of what I'm calling the poise of soul making or what makes the vessel, the space ready for soul making part of what I'm calling, what I have called in the past the crucible. In other words included in it is we are, or rather we are deliberately including, I was deliberately including the emotions. They weren't super strong at that time but even if they were, if they were super strong that would need to be what's included. Just there's dukkha here, there's a kind of grief here etc. So this including the emotions and a kind of softness in holding them. So this is also part of the art, part of kind of weaving that crucible or forming that crucible. So I'm not relating to the emotions in a way that they're just kind of becoming just sensations. Nor am I relating to them and to the dukkha there, emotional and physical as without story. So when I talked about the mindfulness approach I'm sort of relinquishing story, putting it aside, dropping story. Here I'm not relating to it without story. So I'm actually including the story, the story of my life, the narrative of my life, the sense of myself in time. So that's all part of the ingredients. And so including the story also means including time. So I'm not just focusing on just this moment, just this now of these sensations. And the time awareness as I'll describe as I go into explaining what happened, and the time awareness actually is quite multileveled and complex. Because the time awareness included, as things opened up, it included the flow of time, it included this moment's experience of whatever was happening in this moment with the pain, etc. But it also included what I've described several times before as a sense of my whole life as a sub-spicea eternatus from the perspective of eternity, from the perspective of after death. And the narrative of my life, almost like the whole narrative story of my life, viewed from so to speak beyond time or after death. The whole narrative of my life seen from that perspective, like it's an eternal sort of snapshot but it's got the whole narrative in it. So that the time awareness involved or that came actually included all of that. It includes the story, it includes the sense or really the image of my life, of my whole life. So my whole life, when it's looked at as in that kind of sub-spicea eternatus, that eternality, that perspective from beyond death, it's already kind of well on its way to becoming image, a fully imaginal image. So including everything I've just said in the poise of soul-making, including the self and the sense or image of my whole life, especially in the face of death, for knowing a terminal diagnosis, knowing I'm dying. And the sense of self and the sense of my health is kind of circumscribed by the sort of before life, before birth and after death times or periods. So somehow in the time awareness there's all kinds of different senses and levels of time that we're talking about. I may come back to this but this relates to what I was talking about in yesterday's talk about the emptiness of time and what that might open up for us in terms of healing. I hope to come back to that in a second. But what came, so all these ingredients there, and then what came was a kind of sense of a ritualistic kind of giving back of the moments of physical dukkha, the physical challenges and illnesses throughout my life, and I've had long years of chronic illnesses, a kind of ritualistic giving back of all those moments of physical dukkha, physical challenges, physical illnesses, to the divine, to the gods, to the angels. These gods, God, divinities, angels, they were not vividly seen at that moment. So we're not talking about that kind of image where the sense of them was there, it was clearly felt, it was palpable. So they were very much a part of the image, their presence was felt, but they were not vividly seen in the imagination. But there was this ritualistic giving back of these moments of physical dukkha and all the illness, etc., the physical illness, moments of illness, and the sense of those sensations over a life as a holy gift, a sacred gift which I was asked and agreed to bear. This was the imaginal sense that just came, and all the soul-making poise and possibilities were there, and there was the receptivity and the attentiveness and a certain sense of one's whole lives of space, reality and artist. Somehow wrapped up this ritualistic giving back of what I was given as sacred gift, as holy gift, which I was asked and somehow agreed to bear. It was a grace given to me. Someone had to carry this for some reason I didn't understand, I didn't know. And now there was the, in the meditation, there was the handing them back with reverence. Of course that handing back also was echoed a little bit with the sense of dying soon, etc. But in the meditation, handing them back with reverence and with care in this kind of ritualized sacramental way, as if you had, the image was as if of passing back a ritual object in a ceremony. Again, this wasn't visually clear in terms of detail, but distinct, clear visual details. Other images are, this wasn't, but it was the imagistic sense, the imaginal sense of the whole thing. It's part idea, part sense of, it's not just the moment, but actually the whole of life and the whole kind of transaction of life. And this touched my heart deeply and the heart became very tender with it all. Peace came and actually then pleasure in the body, where there was pain, actually pleasure spread. So that's not the point, but there was this attenuation of the unpleasant vedna and pleasant vedna came. To some degree the reduction of the discomfort in here and now. But all the elements of the imaginal were there and this sense of grace and beauty and all the rest of it. And then the painful sensations were also there. It was almost like they were still there as well as the pleasant in this curious, mystically colored, mystically flavored mix of sensations, the painful and the pleasant. And the painful sensations became kind of like ethereal jewels floating in space, radiant jewels floating in space. And the heart bowed to all of that. And the weariness of chronic illness, for some of you who had chronic illness, you know just how tiring it can be for the psyche to have to deal with that, you know, day in, day out, month in, month down, year in, year out. And acute illnesses are very dramatic and, you know, both for the person going through it but also for people who love them or people around them. It stimulates a lot of interest and compassion, etc. And there's a way in which chronic illnesses, they might be less intense sometimes, but they're asking something different of the psyche to bear over a long time. And it can be wearying. And the weariness of the chronic illness was redeemed and given dimensionality and mis-divinity and eternality and meaningfulness and duty and purpose. But duty and purpose that the kind of the rational mind could not understand. I don't understand what's my duty, what's the purpose of this, but it feels like it has a duty, a purpose to it. It feels like there's some meaning to it wrapped up in the meaningfulness. But I cannot say what it is, I cannot understand with my logical mind what it is, what it could be. Beauty, love, lightness, the melting of the heart. I mentioned this founder of Neoplatonism, Plotinus, the other day. And in the last years of his life he had developed some kind of illness. And it's not really clear to us now what that illness was, but at any rate he was abandoned by all his students because they feared that they would catch his illness, they feared that his illness was contagious. So I think for the last two or more years of his life he basically lived in a kind of solitary exile. And there was one of his students who was also a doctor who stayed with him through that period, whose name I've forgotten now. But he was abandoned by the rest of his students and he lay dying. And as he lay dying the doctor was with him, tending to him, just being with him as he died. And after he died the doctor wrote down his last words. Unfortunately this doctor, which seems to be the case for doctors nowadays as well, had not very good handwriting. So it's a little bit unclear exactly, but it was one of two things that he said. Either it was a description of what he was doing as he was dying and he said, excuse me, I'm trying to bring back or trying to give back the divine in myself to the divine in the universe. Or he said as an instruction, give back the divine in yourself to the divine in the universe. And those were his last words. Give back the divine in yourself to the divine in the universe. And so this reminded me a little bit of that. So again we could say all just awareness is divine in terms of it's the same substance, the same divine nature of mind in everyone. But that's all just like water everywhere. It's all water. There's no difference between my awareness and your awareness and the next person's awareness. It's all just the divine substance of awareness. Once you mix it back into divinity it's all just saying like mixing water in water. There's another kind of sacredness and kind of divinity and kind of sanctification of our personhood that we're very much interested in is as human beings in soul making practice. And that's more inclusive of our particulars and our particular narrative and our particular dukkha and the necessity, as I mentioned earlier, the necessity of our particularities and our personality and our dukkha to the divine. So in this sense it was in this image of this kind of ritualistic giving back of these moments of physical dukkha, these physical challenges to the divine, to the angels, to the gods, whose presence I felt but didn't really see vividly. And the sense of these sensations over life being given to me as a grace, as a sacred gift because someone had to carry this for some reason. I didn't understand something I was asked to do and agreed to do. All of this neither real nor not real. All of it theater. Understood that way because it's image. But in that way the divine in me being given back was something very personal. It wasn't just my awareness, let's say, being the same nature as everyone's awareness, universal awareness. So this perhaps just as an illustration, one possibility. And I said, mentioned very briefly, we talked about time the other day and the different views of time as different conventional views of time one's adopting and what they open or close and mentioned that idea of this Neoplatonic idea, the soul engendering time because it wants to know the divine attributes or the level of angels or what was called intelligences or ideas or forms. It wants to know them and they are eternal and timeless and it can't grasp them, it can't know them all at once. So it engenders time, soul engenders time so that it can know them all but they have to be one after the other in sequence, in temporal sequence. We mentioned that the other day. And because the self is always more than one being or more than one way of looking at it, more than one narrative, more even than one soul narrative because we have many angels not just one angel out ahead. So you could say the soul engenders time to know that particular angel where there is this eternity of contract of being given as grace, as gift, a sacred gift, this pain and then that's played out or stretched out over time, over fifty something years between birth and death because I also need to have times within that, other times where I know other senses of self, other angels, not just that one, I'm more than that. There's more to my soul than one story, one narrative, one angel. There are more angels to my soul than one. So it's just an illustration. There's a, I don't know if we can make a summary but there's a lot about the poise, the soul making poise, if that's our intention for soul making with a certain dukkha, with a certain physical pain, there were a lot of elements, a lot of aspects to that that I ran through and then potentially this, including the self, including this kind of beyond death, this sub-species, this view of one's whole life, one's whole narrative. So time and timeless get woven in. A way of being with the dukkha and the emotions and the story that don't cut them out but also don't squeeze them or look at them in a way where they just become sensations. So after all this is part of the crucible. And then an image, isn't it? There's one possible illustration. As I was reflecting on that a little later, I also wondered then in that image sense of receiving these pains, these discomforts, these health difficulties, long chronic health difficulties in the image sense of receiving all that from the divine, from beyond or before life as part of my image, the image of me, the angel of me, the image of it as my duty to carry out, sorry, to carry, my duty to carry this for some reason to manifest, to express it and the image then of giving them back ritually, reverentially. And again, none of that reified neither real nor not real. Imagine a middle way theatre like quality. I'm reflecting on all that, I reflected on a couple of things about ritual actually. And I have to tell another little story here. There was a period after about a year, no, after about, you're supposed to get for the cancer I had, typical standard treatment is six months of chemotherapy. And I persuaded the doctor because I knew it was stage four cancer and I knew the prognosis was very poor, I persuaded the doctor if he would just continue giving me chemotherapy after the six months. And reluctantly he agreed. But after two more months, I actually developed an infection, what's called a sepsis, which is very dangerous, some of you will know when you're on chemotherapy because chemotherapy depletes your immune system. So you have this infection which could rapidly spread and just kill you because you don't have an immune system up and running strongly because the chemotherapy has knocked out your immune system. So after about eight months of chemo, I ended up in hospital with this sepsis and the doctor was really quite concerned and he said absolutely no more chemo, etc. And so he said no more chemo and I had to take a break and I took a break and he didn't want to give me any more after that, I understand, he was very, very concerned. It's a long story, I won't get into parts of it. I found another doctor who was willing to give me more chemo and he, on the other hand, was more anxious. He better start it soon because if you wait too long, then the cancer is just going to come back. But in that time that I wasn't on chemo, my body also started to recover from the effects of the chemo which is really quite toxic and depleting and damaging on all kinds of organs and systems in the body. So I was beginning just to feel a little more human and a little better and it had been, as I've shared in other talks, really quite a lot of dukkha going through the chemo, not just because of its effects on my body and my energy and make me feel sick and diarrhea and all the rest of it. But also I've shared elsewhere just how difficult it was to go into that chemo ward and the soulness of it. I've shared this elsewhere, I'm not going to go into it now. So in this period where I had been now, I think almost three months without chemo, two months or getting on for three months, and some people, this doctor and some other people were really anxious for me to start chemo again and I could really feel a part of me that was really, I really don't know if I can, it was really really hard to envisage putting myself back in that soulless chemo ward and putting my body through that primarily because it was a soulless. And then I remember working with Catherine one night and we were working together on soulmaking stuff and I asked could we do a ritual because I had decided I would go back to chemo but it was a big deal, it felt like a big deal and a big ask of myself. And so we did a ritual one night which I sort of devised and I can't remember exactly now but we had a little crucible and I cut some of my nails from my fingers, my fingernails in there and a bit of my hair and a bit of facial hair and a bit of dead skin, I peeled off and put it in there and maybe a bit of saliva I think I put in and some body hair, I can't remember my eyelashes or just hair from my arm or something, different body parts as you know that the Buddha kind of enumerates them in the satipatthana sitta. And just put these in the crucible and then I don't remember the details and offered this crucible, offered my body up to, you know, in anticipation and in ritual preparation for re-entering chemo relating, trying to relate to it soulfully in a soulmaking way in relation to the challenge and the dukkha of that, the coming challenge and dukkha of that and sort of burnt, burnt those body elements, parts of the body and I can't, there were other aspects, I can't remember sort of choreographing the ritual, I don't remember, I remember that included some aspect for my mind and perceptions because it was actually, that was what was quite difficult as well as I said in the chemo ward and the soullessness and the plastic and the atmosphere in there and what people talked about and what people didn't talk about, shared this elsewhere. Anyway, the point is we had, we made a ritual and Catherine and I did that and it was very beautiful and really helped me take that next step and re-entering chemo. But one of the things I was wondering about and then after this kind of image of a ritual that I was just describing before in the Sensing the Pain with Soul was this question that I've had and I think I've put it out other times but the question I have is when does the materialization in ritual actually increase and support the soulmaking and when does it decrease the kind of soul power and the soulmaking? I think this is a really, really important question because in the meditation I described a little while ago in this talk, it was an image of a ritual and there was no action, I was just sat cross-legged etc. in meditation postures meditating, there was no materialization of anything. In the pre-chemo ritual with Catherine, there was the materialization. So when is a materialization, when does that enhance the soulmaking and the power and the soul power and when does it decrease it and why? Why? I think that's a really, really interesting question and it parallels questions for instance like when I described like you can get a sense in meditation of your energy body moving in certain ways or dancing in certain ways or whatever or vocalizing in certain ways or roaring or whatever it is, when does it help that that's actually materialized, concretized, acted on and when actually does it disempower it to do so? When it actually has much more soul power, much more soulmaking power, when there's no materialization, concretization, acturization in physical reality of on the physical plane of that image of what's happening in the energy body or the energy body wants to do. I think this is a really, really important question and that we need to be open to both and able to do both and able to do both artfully. But when is this one going to be more helpful than that one, more soulmaking and why? Some going back to Neoplatonism, I think Plotinus held that action is always inferior to contemplation but I would disagree. We do include rituals on our soulmaking retreats and we have included movement and hopefully will include vocalization and other things at different times. But still is this question of when to act and materialize, when to not and why does it help sometimes and not others? Other times the reverse is true. So that's one question, it's an ongoing question, I think it's a really interesting question. But a second thing I was wondering about following that meditation experience I described, it's an illustration of possibility for working with pain. I started to wonder whether giving is always a necessary ingredient of soulful ritual. Is giving always a necessary ingredient of soulful ritual? So I started to wonder about the Eucharist for example, the Catholic Mass. So there was in that image there was receiving and then there was the sense of being given something and receiving something and the sense of reverentially giving it back. And all of it was kind of ritualistically receiving and being given and then ritualistically giving it back with all of it with a lovely sense of reverence and beauty. But I wondered what that, is that always a necessary ingredient for ritual? Or one of the more empowering, one of the ingredients that's more empowering for ritual? So I still don't know the answer actually but it's something I'm just sharing an ongoing question with you. It is interesting, I got interested and started to look up the word Eucharist and etymology and Eucharist actually means thankfulness, thanks. So it implies a gift and of course there's the gift of the body and blood of Christ that one receives in the Catholic Eucharist. But there's also, so there's the gift to us of the body and blood of Christ. There's also the gift of his peace, of Christ's peace when he says, my peace I give unto you. Beautiful. So there's the gift of that kind of dimensional divine sacred peace and all that can be pregnant with the dimensionality of what that can mean, Christ's peace given to us, my peace I give to you. But there's also in the Eucharist, as far as I understand it, I didn't grow up Catholic, there's a gift from the congregation to each other that they give that peace to each other, they give the peace they've received from Christ to each other, so there's giving and receiving. So this is part of what I was wondering and there is that in different ways and maybe more in the Eucharist that I'm unaware of. Is also interesting, another word for Eucharist in, or another word for that similar kind of ceremony at least in other Catholic denominations and traditions is communion, holy communion. Means something like union with God, not so much oneness or union but being together so there's communion with God or communion with the Church, with the body of Christ, the body of Christ also means the Church. And so there's a giving of oneself in communion. Another word for Eucharist is mass and mass is from the Latin missa which is from the verb miteri and miteri is to send away, so we have in English we have dismiss and we also have words like missive or mission, we're sent on a mission or a missive is something we send. So there's a dismissal at the end of the mass and that's where it gets its name. You're sent away with the priest's blessing and with having received the holy sacrament. And so we become in that sense, perhaps one interpretation is that we who have received what has been given to us in ritual, this gift from God, we then go out as gifts from God to the world, to others and to the world. So we're giving ourselves, we're passing on that gift, we are the gift that's passed on. So I don't know but it's an ongoing question and since ritual I think is very much a part of soul making practice and I'm very interested in it and what's involved and what's important in developing that. We don't have set prescribed formulaic rituals, we haven't so far, we've kept them always very, they're always in fact created there and then on the retreats we've done them, sometimes they have spontaneous elements in them, so we don't have one ritual or even several rituals that we repeat so far. So far I like it that way but I'm open. But I'm very interested in it so I was partly wondering that, I don't know the answers. Is receiving and giving a necessary part of ritual or is it an ingredient, a possible ingredient of ritual that can be very empowering? First thing, and in a way connected to what I just said, is, so I am actually open to the idea of having developing set ritual formula that then get repeated so I'm certainly not close to that idea. But I do think there's something for this capacity to create and discover rituals that are new for the soul making. But connected to that, also, if I describe that practice, that imaginal practice, that sensing the pain with soul, but I really want to communicate, in a way what I really want to communicate is illustrate a possibility and get a general sense of what may need to be involved. Some or all of what I pointed to in terms of the poise, etc. I think what I really want to say is please don't assume that imaginal practice is formulaic, that there's a formula. Sometimes it might seem that way but for me it really needs to, I think for its full flourishing and the fullness of its possibilities, it needs to retain a sense of improvisation and opportunism and openness and flexibility. Some of those earlier practices I described with insight ways of looking or whatever, we could say they're more or less formulaic. Even then there's lots of improvisatory possibilities and variations. But I think when we come to imaginal practice and the R of that, that R, careful of getting into a sort of formulaic way of thinking. First I do this, one, two, three, like that. So often the case if I'm working with someone in an interview that I have an intuitive sense at some point, it just comes that this or that needs to happen, x or y needs to happen, or something needs to be put in relationship with this image or whatever. But that x or y needs to happen or whatever it is, is often not something I've actually thought of before or mentioned in talks or systematized in the teachings. So to me there's really part of the beauty comes in the improvised, open, attentive nature of the way we approach the practice with this flexibility. And there's grace there because when it just, one gets an intuitive sense, oh this needs to happen, or this needs to get emphasized, or I need to put this image in relationship with this other thing, another image or another particular dukkha or whatever it is. And they're not things that one has thought of before or formulated. And that's part of the grace, that's part of the discover of the create discover, that's part of the humility in relation to soul as well. So yes we certainly can talk about what goes in to making a crucible for soul making work with dukkha. We can talk about the elements of the imaginal, we can talk about, what did I call it today, the poise of soul making, of readiness for soul making. We can talk about what goes on in there, but there's not necessarily a certain order, and there might be other things that get left out or things that occur to us, that are given to us as graces. So the whole thing really becomes an art that's partly improvised and not just the stuff that I'm doing that's coming from my will. It's in relationship, so to speak, in relationship to soul, to angel, we are given, and part of what we're given is an intuition, or intuitions about what might be included, what might need to happen, etc. So yes, of course, this is part of the balance. There is a place for working, for my technique, for art, but there's also the place for grace, and the other, and soul, and then the infinity of soul as other, and the notion of receiving from soul what we hadn't formalized, hadn't occurred to us, hadn't figured out. It's not a technical step. It's both. There's a balance. There's a straddling of those two aspects or moments, directions. Visit dharmaseed.org slash donate to learn more. And thanks.

 Okay, let's continue on the track of ontology for a little bit. And there's several points I would like to make so we can weave them together. So the first comes up in relation to a question that someone asked. What is the difference between the imaginal middle way and the middle way of emptiness? So this is an important ontological inquiry, an important ontological clarification that needs to be made here. What's the difference between the imaginal middle way and the middle way of emptiness? So the middle way of emptiness was something coined actually by the Buddha, a term coined by the Buddha in the Kachayana Sutta, which I mentioned the other day in the Pali Canon, where he answers Kachayana's question about right view and what's right view. And he says right view is the Buddha's middle way, which falls between the two extreme views of it is or it exists on one hand, and it isn't or it doesn't exist on the other hand. And that's his definition of the middle way. Much more commonly important, what most people are much more familiar with, of course, is the Buddha defining the middle way as a middle way between sensual indulgence, indulgence in the sense pleasures and hardcore asceticism on the other hand. So the middle way. But there's a second meaning of middle way and that's in the Pali Canon that the Buddha used. And that second meaning became the primary meaning in the Mahayana teachings. Nagarjuna and others picked up and really you could say the whole elaboration of and profundity and sophistication and breadth of the teachings on emptiness in the Mahayana, the Buddhism Mahayana and Vajrayana comes really out of that couple of sentences exchange in the Pali Canon between the Buddha and Kachayana where the Buddha uses the term middle way as an ontological kind of teaching. It really has to do with emptiness, although he doesn't, as I pointed out there, use the word empty or emptiness in that exchange. It's still what we're talking about when we use those terms empty and emptiness. So there's the middle way of emptiness and then in the soul making teachings when we talk about the nodes of the lattice or the elements or aspects of the imaginal, we also have something called the imaginary middle way. So what's the difference between these two? Because they've got similar sounding titles, so are they the same or are they different? Well they're different and it's important to actually clarify this. So we can also, you know, that element of the lattice we can also, that we call imaginary way, we can also call it theater like quality and we do or neither real nor not real. Those are perfectly adequate synonyms and adequate terms for what we mean by the imaginary middle way. So all three, imaginary middle way, theater like quality, neither real nor not real, they all say the same thing. As an element of the imaginal, it is though, like the other elements of the imaginal, it's primarily a description of the qualities of the imaginal realm. Something we notice, something noticed or empirically observed that is characteristic of images when they are more fully imaginal. So that's how the whole elements teaching came up or arose. It was really me trying to pinpoint the flavor of the terrain, the flavor of the realm, what's characteristic of the realm of the imaginal. It was clear to me that, you know, images having and that were what I would call imaginal had different sets of qualities and implications and aspects, etc., than images used in other ways or in other systems, whether it's red wine or other psychologies or, you know, other things. So I was trying to kind of designate, pinpoint what's the difference. As such, it was just kind of what was involved is just a sort of hanging out with an image in the Mundus imaginalis, in the imaginal realm. And actually even that, the Mundus imaginalis is Corbin's term. So we're using it differently, the word imaginal, that he used it, which is different than how Hillman used it, etc. But it was really hanging out and then just noticing, noticing these subtle differences or subtle as the characteristics of what I would call images that are more fully imaginal, in contrast to images that are not really what we would call imaginal. So it's something, it's really a description, an observation, something we notice. And in that, it's actually this imaginal middle way is quite a wide designation, okay? It's quite a like quality, neither real nor not real. It's quite a like the other elements, humility, etc., grace. What's meant by that is quite broad. The word itself needs to be the concept itself, the designation pinpointing itself needs to allow room to be able to stretch, and I'll come back to that in a minute, to be able to stretch, to broaden, etc., to have softer and elastic edges. It's quite a wide designation. In contrast, when we talk about the emptiness middle way, the middle way of emptiness that the Buddha was talking about and Nagarjna and others picked up on, the emptiness middle way is the result of a very careful, usually long ontological inquiry in practice and in conception. In other words, after practicing with, with emptiness practices or ways of looking or analytical practices, after really thinking it through and thinking it through in a very subtle way, etc., and sophisticated, bringing the philosophy with practice and conceptual work, meditative practice and conceptual work, what results is the middle way of emptiness. It's the result of that ontological inquiry. So while we can and we do entertain various ontological systems and conceptual frameworks in when we practice the imaginal and sensing the soul, there is not one ontology or ontological view, there's not one ontology or one ontological view that we are aiming towards, that we are hoping to arrive at or adopting exclusively. The imaginal middle way leaves ontological inquiry out of the forefront of imaginal practice and sensing the soul practice. So emptiness middle way is a result of an ontological inquiry and in imaginal practice we're kind of leaving that aside. We might do it beforehand or around it, but the actual imaginal practice doesn't involve ontological inquiry. And there's no one ontology as I said, one ontological viewpoint that we're hoping to arrive at and then we've got it. That's it, that's our ontology. So of course, and I'll come back to this, ontological inquiries may become soul making or may be or may become soul making for some people at some times. Now this whole question of ontology becomes very exciting for the soul and thus images and fantasies build up around and in relation to ontological inquiries and ontological ideas. And it's also the case that the soul making dynamic, the Erosychilogos dynamic will eventually shake up and expand whatever ontologies we profess or hold. But still ontological inquiry is not primary in imaginal or sensing the soul practice and we are not seeking an answer to an ontological question there. Whereas an emptiness practice we are, we want to come to the answer, the truth about the fact of emptiness, the universal truth there. So as emptiness practices and understandings deepen and refine the emptiness middle way, the middle way of emptiness gets clearer and in a way, well, a narrower, it's more like a razor's edge. It's very fine, this between it is and it is not, it exists and it does not, not real, neither real nor not real. From the emptiness point of view, the emptiness becomes clearer and much more like a razor's edge. In other words, the tendencies towards nihilism, it's not real, this isn't real, nothing's real on the one hand and reification, it's real, it is, it really exists on the other hand. The two extreme views that the Buddha pointed to and again, the Mayana picks up on a lot. The tendencies towards nihilism on the one hand, reification on the other hand, they're gradually diminished, gradually as we go deeper and deeper with emptiness practice and emptiness understanding. And as our understanding comes closer and closer to the sort of narrow tight rope of the middle way of emptiness. So again, to contrast the imaginal middle way and contrast the emptiness middle way is not such a precise or narrow concept. Partly because the whole imaginal process admits various ontologies and more ontological systems as we've pointed out several times in the past and illustrated in different talks and things. So it's less of a tight rope or a razor's edge and more like a kind of avenue, a wide road, I don't know, a boulevard or something than a razor's edge than a tight rope. So that within the range of the imaginal middle way, there can be various positions of more or less reification. And again, the concept of the imaginal middle way, like the other concepts of soul making Dharma has soft and elastic edges. Still, starting soul making practice with a careful emphasis on kind of curbing the reificationist tendency and then only then in time widening the range of ontological views in play, widening the range of ontological views about image or what we're sensing the soul, exploring positions at different points on the width of that broad road of the imaginal middle way. That will be the most fruitful way to progress that order. Starting with careful emphasis on curbing the reificationist tendency and then broadening out from there slowly, gradually. Because if one has in the past only reified images, if that's my history, I've only known and worked with images that I've reified. And that's mostly the case for those who use images in psychological or spiritual or shamanic practice that they usually reified. But even if a person says, I'm not reified, I'm not reified, unless they really are making it clear that they're not reifying, you can pretty much bet that they're reifying. You may not hear that word, but it takes a lot of work to not reify something. So if one's used images in other ways, more conventional psychotherapies or spiritualities or shamanic practices, and the images have been reified, then it will be very difficult, I think, to come out of that habit of reification and move towards the other side of this wide road of the imaginal middle way and have the facility to explore a less reified stance. And if that's the case, then I cannot move away from the reificationist side of the road to explore the less reified road. Then that whole side of the road, that whole territory of soul-making possibility, won't open up. The opposite direction of movement, from a stricter non-reifying, which is what we tend to emphasize at first, from a stricter non-reifying gradually to explore more reifying positions, that won't be so difficult or face so much inertia for us in our practice. Because reifying is actually a normal human tendency, especially when we feel touched by an image or perception, when it matters to us, when it helps us. So if we think about what will allow a greater total territory to be accessible and open to us, it will be, I think, if we proceed gradually in that order from being really quite strict and careful about the non-reifying as much as we can, without getting too, policing it too tightly, getting too anxious about that for most people. It's all very individualist, you know. But generally speaking, a greater total territory will be accessible and open up to us if we go from emphasizing the non-reifying at first and then gradually expand it to more reified ontologies that reify more, reifying images, etc. So the measurement, in a way, just to sum up, is really just something observed, something noticed about a quality aspect, characteristic of images that are more fully imagile. The emptiness middle way is a result of a careful ontological inquiry in practice and in conception. In the emptiness middle way, we're aiming for a kind of answer, a result, to understand what that really means, the emptiness middle way. It's one very narrow razor's edge tight rope of truth between is and isn't. In imaginal practice, we're actually not sticking to one ontology or ontological view or ontological system even, so we can just as easily entertain, you know, an idea of a providential divinity, a providential dharmakaya or Buddha nature that makes appear to us images and even events and persons in our life, you know, in response to what we need at a certain time in our path. We can entertain that kind of ontology as well as an ontology of a Buddha nature and dharmakaya and divinity that does no such thing, that has no providence, as well as we can entertain an ontology conceptual frame. There's no such thing as Buddha nature or divinity or dharmakaya in any of those kind of transcendent ways. So we have a range of ontologies and we're not aiming at one necessarily. And anyway, ontology is not forefront in our practice. In the imaginal middle way, in contrast to this narrow tightrope of truth that we're aiming for as a result of our inquiry, the emptiness, the imaginal middle way is a wide boulevard and we want to actually have freedom to take up any ontological position regarding reification on any of the points across that width of the boulevard and see what they each do. But it might be easier if we start with the non-reification one. So if we get too much into a habit of reifying images, it would be very hard to then open up non-reified images in all the soul realms and soul worlds that they open up. So that's a clarification, hopefully, between the emptiness middle way and the imaginal middle way. So, you know, as far as emptiness is concerned as well, it's important to point out that from a strictly sort of narrow Buddha-dharma point of view, all we need to know about ontology for the sake of liberation from suffering and liberation from Avijaya, fundamental ignorance, all we need to know about the ontology of things is that things are thoroughly, completely empty. And if that realization of emptiness, or rather let's say it this way, and that realization of emptiness needs to have woven into it, or alongside it, hopefully woven into it, an understanding that we need to respect conventional reality, that there are some conventional realities that we really need to respect. As I pointed out yesterday, if we have penetrated to that result of the emptiness middle way, the understanding of the thorough, deep, radical and comprehensive emptiness of all things, if we have done that via the ways of looking approach, then ethics and karma and dependent arising of self and world, dependent on attitude, dependent on action, dependent on mind state, et cetera, all that is obvious. And in fact woven in, it's obvious because it's woven into the very investigation into emptiness right from the beginning, as we talked about yesterday. And if we go deep enough in our inquiry into emptiness, in our penetration of the truth of emptiness, to understand the middle way of emptiness in its deepest and most precise sense, then we see that no self also is just a view. We can pick it up, there is no self, but it's just a view, it's not an ultimate truth. And the view of self becomes just as available, or available again, if you like, as the view of no self. Emptiness is just a view. Emptiness is empty. Not self is just a view. Self is just a view. And all of these become available as views. We are only left with ways of looking. But from a Dharma perspective, this is all we need to know about ontology. That things are empty because that's what liberates us from suffering and from the root cause of suffering, which is avicya. And hopefully woven into that understanding, that ontological understanding, that everything is empty, we also understand the need to respect some conventional realities. And hopefully, particularly around ethical consequences, karma, dependent arising, in that sense. And secondly, that we have the flexibility to respect self as much as no self. Emptiness is not just respect, but to practice and to see those ways. So that's from a strictly Buddha Dharma point of view. That's actually all we need to understand ontologically. And if you've really gone into the question of emptiness, you will realize that even a realization, a full realization of emptiness still leaves a lot of questions about the exact ontology of different conventional realities, of different relative truths. In the history of Buddhism, there has been a vehement argument about this over 2500 years. Certainly once you get into the Mahayana and certainly Tibet, really quite a lot of very sophisticated and hot-blooded polemic debate around all this. So you only have to look at Mipham and Mipham Rinpoche from the turn of the 20th century just before and into the early 20th century. His engages and dialogues with other traditions, including Gelug scholars, or look at some of the writings of the Karmapas, particularly I think the 8th Karmapa, Mipham Rinpoche, etc. This, especially when it comes to this question of the relationship between conventional and ultimate reality, conventional truths and the truth of emptiness. The thingness of things and the emptiness of things. This is really quite a long-standing argument. In terms of how it then applies to Tantra as well and much else, there's a lot there that's left open and open to debate. Some of that debate, particularly some of the things that Mipham and Mipham got interested in, bears very much on what we actually understand by the emptiness of something. Some of the areas of that argument pertain to the status of Tantric deities, the ontological state of Tantric deities and other things. Some of it actually pertains to what does emptiness mean. Or is this version of emptiness actually liberating or not? I've gone into this briefly but in a fair amount of detail. It's quite a central piece of the last portions of seeing the free. You can find it there and you can also find some references there if you're interested. The main point is that even a full comprehensive understanding of emptiness still leaves questions regarding the exact ontology of conventional realities. We could say the same might be true of, for example, quantum physics as it goes deeper. What exactly is the ontological status, the reality status of a basic particle? We think, okay, this desk is made from molecules and atoms, etc. And those are made of protons and neutrons and electrons. And then we go down, there's even more basic particles, etc. Well, then an electron is classified as the basic particle still. What is the reality status? What is the ontological status of those basic particles? And it's not simple, as I mentioned the other day on retreat at Guy House. Niels Bohr, one of the founders of quantum physics and a Nobel Prize winner, he said, everything we think of is real is made up of things that we cannot think of as real. But now even more since his death, even space and time are regarded as emergent and not fundamental phenomena. At a quantum level, they emerge, they're constructions, and in some sense also dependent on the observer. So Einstein did some of that work with his relativity theories, and then even more so at a quantum level. So we're still left with these questions about the ontology of different conventional realities. And this is important, and when we then come to soul-making teachings, of course, that they cannot help stimulating such questions, or they should stimulate such questions, and they do stimulate such questions, not for everyone, but certainly for some people. Some people will get very derisive, etc. Some people will be too easy, perhaps too lazy and quick to just adopt a certain ontological acceptance. But you know, it's up to them. And I've been through all this in other talks, I'm not going to dwell on it too much anymore. But the questions pertain, ontological questions don't go away with regards to soul and image and soul-making and all that. They are all empty, yes, but it's still, as I said, emptiness, the realization of emptiness, gone all the way to the end, still leaves questions about the exact ontology of different conventional realities. So what about the ontology of soul? This is something we've talked about quite a lot, but very briefly just to repeat, we can define soul in a couple of ways. One is just soul is a kind of way of looking. It's a kind of way of looking or it's a group of ways of looking even. Soul is the collection of ways of looking that are soul-making, that open up a sense of soulfulness. That's what soul is, so that open up the elements of the imaginal, that deliver the elements of the match. Soul is just a way of looking, it's not an entity. Or if we want to define soul as a kind of entity, it's that entity, that instrument, that organ, so to speak, in the human being, which looks in those ways, looks in those ways that open up soulfulness, that support soulfulness, that engender soulfulness and soul-making. So that soul-making then, if we think of soul as an entity, soul-making then is a kind of a making or a growing of that organ, of that instrument, a growing of its size, of its range, of its capacity, like a muscle that grows, or an organ or child's brain that's growing in its capacity as an entity. So, either it's not an entity, we think of it as just a kind of way of looking, or it's an entity, but that entity is just as empty as any other entity. It's just as empty as a self, and we use the language of self, it's just as without too much problem in our conventional exchanges with each other, and the way we think about our lives, and the way we relate to what's actually very important in our lives, we use the language of self. I want this, I don't want that, I really hope that, I feel this, etc. But if we use the language of a sort of entity language for soul, then that entity of soul is empty like self is empty, like the aggregates are empty, like the body is empty, empty in itself, empty of phenomenal existence, empty of truly being an inherently existence thing, an existent thing, vedanet is empty, consciousness is empty, a moment is empty, all the aggregates are empty, any phenomenon is empty. When I talked, I think it was in the mirrored gates, and began to talk about sensing the soul, and actually playing a little bit with opening up the ontological considerations or possibilities of more rarefication, a bit more rarefication, when we are practicing sensing the soul, and the perceptions that come up with sensing the soul, that's a really interesting area as well. So why bother to go into all that? Well, partly for our own purposes, in the sense that our conceptual framework, the whole logos of soul-making dharma, is really based in and on emptiness, it's based in ideas like create, discover, neither real nor not real, and all that. So it's simply rooted in that kind of, I would say, more sophisticated ontology, and that kind of participatory ontology, or an ontology of participation, rather than a sort of stark notions of independent existence, as if that's what qualifies for reality as an independent existence. Partly for our own purposes, it's based on a more sophisticated ontology, the whole logos, the whole conceptual framework of soul-making dharma here. But partly going, you know, explaining the ontology of soul, briefly, just now repeating what I've said elsewhere, I think, partly also to kind of proactively rebuff certain expected objections and critiques from either Buddhists who tend to think in a very, let's say, narrow and common way, and perhaps not very well worked out, with a very not very well worked out ontology. Now to try and rebuff certain objections and critiques, well that's not buddhadharma, if you're talking about soul, didn't the Buddha say, that's not something real, that's just metaphysical speculation, any language of soul must be just metaphysical speculation, and it's the opposite of phenomenology, etc. I've gone into this at great length elsewhere, I'm not going to repeat it too much now, so we'll say a couple of things. So partly it's the sort of in response to that kind of, you know, somewhat typical or typically expected objection, and partly it's for our own purposes because it's actually rooted in soul-making, is necessarily rooted in a more sophisticated ontology and epistemology than the ones that most people in our culture are used to, and that our culture, you know, typically regards as simply this is what's real, that's not real, this is what's true, and it's because x or y, in terms of independent existence, etc., socially agreed upon perceptions. It's interesting if you just linger on this just a little bit more, some people in the dharma, some expositions of buddhadharma, some explanations of buddhadharma, or of simply of kind of mindfulness extractions from buddhadharma, and some people use reductionist materialism in a kind of obvious and explicit way, and they explain dharma and explain meditation, and even explain liberation perhaps, and from those premises, from the premises of sort of reductionist materialism, in other words in terms of atoms and neurological networks, etc., and neurotransmitters, and all the rest of it, and they explain what's happening in meditation and liberation as perhaps a change or even a kind of increased efficacy of, you know, for example, neural pathways. Other expositions of buddhadharma never mention atoms or that sort of things, the components or the elements of reductionist materialism, they never mention them, they never perhaps even mention the classical scientific materialist worldview, but they try to present a more, what might seem to be a more phenomenological, let's put that in inverted commas, more phenomenological dharma, or a more existentialist dharma, and a more phenomenological existentialist idea of suffering, of what suffering is, what the problem is, and of what liberation from suffering is or might be. The whole thing is kind of given a more, attempted is a more phenomenological or existential approach without mentioning kind of scientific materialist elements or views. But if we go into it, if I try and adopt such a, I try and propose such an approach, I actually quickly realize that that kind of phenomenology in inverted commas is very limited, because there's only one way of looking there, there's only one way of looking that's admitted, and that way of looking sees the truth. And this is how all human beings, or suppose this is assumed, this is how all human beings, if they are honest, and if they are brave, that's how they will experience self and world. They will experience it like this, this is what this phenomenology says, what a lot of phenomenologies do actually, or attempts at phenomenological philosophy and psychology. There's no place there for different ways of looking, and different ways of looking then opening up different senses, whole different perceptions and senses of self and world and cosmos. And similarly, the existentialist kind of dharma rests on an assumption that the sort of the meaningless flat cosmos of classical scientific materialism, it rests on the assumption that's a proven reality. So it rests on reductionist materialist ideas as a presumed background and basis, even if they are not mentioned, never mentioned. But that, and you know, it's interesting that the fact that reductionist materialist conceptions are assumed to be irrevocably proven as fact, that may be part at least of what gives some of those existential Buddhists their and sort of often kind of haughty and unbudgable arrogance that comes across in their stance and their tone. Problem with all that is that physics itself, the same scientific method that delivered that kind of view, starting in the 16th, 17th century, let's say, has, as it developed, that same scientific method has begun to bring about the crumbling of that basis. Not just physics, but also contemporary Western philosophy and also was deconstructed and kind of demolished by Nagarjuna's Dharma, etc. and the whole Mayana take on deeper understanding of emptiness, deeper working out of what emptiness means. So that whole background view and basis, not mentioned, but assumed real and so rested on, it's no longer tenable and sure as a truth, as the reality of things. So we're in an interesting place right now in terms of Western philosophy, I think also in terms of Buddha Dharma, certainly in terms of modern science. And I think, as I've said, I think I've said elsewhere, I'll say it again now, I think ontology and also epistemology which goes with it, which is how can I trust this knowledge about what's real? How can I trust, what do I trust? My senses, my thinking, my scripture, other people's opinion. So I've talked about this a lot elsewhere, just to say now, ontology and epistemology are never-ending explorations and questions. I don't think humanity will ever come to the end of these things, of these explorations and possibilities and the questions there. And as such, because of the never-ending, never-endingness of that, of ontology and epistemology, there can be Eros for it. Ontology itself, as I alluded to earlier, ontology itself can become for us an erotic, imaginal other, the whole area, the whole domain, the whole inquiry, the image of oneself as ontological inquirer, etc., an image of oneself on that path. And there can be soul-making out of that erotic, imaginal relationship, or in that, with that erotic, imaginal relationship with the never-endingness of ontology and ontological questions and explorations. So we can get very excited about this, very into it, very struck by its possibilities for the soul. Soul-making can come from ontology, from certain ontological views. I'll come back to that. But it can also come in relationship to ontology. So I don't remember in the Four Parables of Stone and Light series if I said this, but I'll say it again. I was thinking, you know, if you hear someone with, say, with regard to ontology or with regard to epistemology or even with regard to things like emotions and ethics, human emotions and ethics, if you hear someone or read someone, say, they figured it out, they know the answers now. This, like either any of those areas, ontology, epistemology, emotions, ethics, probably other areas, we figured it out. I know what the truth is there now. Or, on the other hand, if you hear someone, well, if you hear someone say they figured out, run a mile, I would run a mile from such a person. And they've come to the end of ontological inquiry, epistemological inquiry, they've understood fully what human emotions are and involve, how they arise, what they can be, or ethical questions. I would run a mile. And also, if you come across what's maybe just as popular these days, especially in people influenced by some fairly recent Western philosophy, though I'm not interested in ontology, I'm not interested in epistemology, that's all metaphysics, I put that aside. It's not relevant. It's not what the Buddha taught. It's not relevant to life, etc, etc. I would run a mile. You should run a mile. Either one of those extreme views is, to me, problematic. That's funny. I was going to say it's problematic. I said the other day, and I pointed out several times recently, ontology and epistemology are inevitable. They're inevitable in the very fabric of our perception, not even as big philosophical rambling inquiries with all this conceptual grinding, etc. But they are woven in. Ontological assessments, epistemological assessments, are implicitly non-verbally, non-conception, or let's say non-verbally, non-unthinkingly woven in as conceptions into every perception we have as human beings. They're inevitable. Even if they're incongcludable questions of ontology, ontology and epistemology are inevitable. And I don't know, but I have a sense really that Western philosophy went through a phase, I think called itself post-metaphysical. Well, we might now be in a post-post-metaphysical phase, or just about to be, or something like that. So there's a lot here, again, that can open up soul-making, that can be soul-making for us in these inquiries, but also allow more soul-making to open up, and I want to come back to that. But let's just stay with this for a while, and actually bring in the connection between Eros and ontology. So again, let's see if I can try and convey what I'm trying to get out here. The scientific methods attempt, you know, started with this attempt to sort of say, let's exclude affect, human affect, in other words emotion and desire, which could be regardless of affect, exclude affect and desire from the process of inquiring into truth. And the scientific methods, when it arose in the 16th, 17th century, really got going, the scientific methods attempt to exclude affect and desire from the process of inquiring into truth, instigated and then installed for modernity, for modern culture, a kind of, well really a definition of truth as partly that which is independent of the affect or desire of an observer. So it kind of started with that, this is our MO, this is our modus operandi, this is how we're going to go about things, and then that became a definition of truth. It instigated, then it installed it, so that that's how we tend to think of what is true. Truth is that which is independent of affect or desire of an observer. But if one realises, so one goes deeper into all these things, that there is no truth independent of the observer. Seems to be very much that quantum physics, as much as some people don't like that conclusion, that is what quantum physics is concluding, has remained unchallenged for, you know, getting on for a hundred years now. Like, not unchallenged, but it has remained without convincing challenge at all. Some people still really don't like it. Very few people have really picked it up and inquired and opened up and looked further into its implications, but that seems to be, so far, unbudgetable. So if one realises there's no similar conclusions from Western philosophies and certainly from Buddha Dharma and emptiness and the ways of looking approach, if one realises there is no truth independent of the observer, then the way of looking of the observer must be considered. And why, then, can't affect be readmitted? In my readmission of the observer and the position of the observer and what the observer does and how the observer looks, why can't I readmit affect and desire and even eros? And perhaps they're given even equal status with any other affect. So desire and eros are given equal status with other affect. They're just all part of this idea that truth doesn't exist independently of the observer. There are just ways of looking, no ultimate truth, just ways of looking. And so there's what I see with this affect, what I see with that affect, what I see when there's eros, what I see when there's some other emotion, etc. We can go a little bit further into this, push in a slightly different way. If the truth, and put that even in inverted commas, is instead kind of something that's infinitely penetrable, so it's not so much there are lots of different angles on something, but there's more that truth is something infinitely penetrable, is a journey into dimensionality. And yes, we might say dimensionality and divinity. A journey of penetration, if you like, or opening to, if you want a more receptive mode, opening deeper to, opening oneself deeper to. Then if truth is defined that way, infinitely penetrable and a journey, then there is no one final ultimate truth, except this general kind of journey into more disclosures, more discoveries. And if that is what reality is, this deepening journey, never ending journey, infinite, infinite sort of that a penetrative movement. If that's what reality is, then it is exactly eros in the way that we are using that word. Eros is we define it in the way that it wants closeness, contact, wants to know, wants to connect with, and in that wanting more penetration, wanting more opening, it ignites the soul making dynamic and that allows more deeper penetration, the generation of more beyonds, the discovery of more facets and aspects of what it is that we're in relationship with, what our subject is, what we're penetrating, etc. So it's exactly eros in the way that we in the soul making are using that word. It's exactly eros that reveals the truth and reality. And in that case, it's eros is more valuable than other effects and an absence of an effect and emotion. Do you understand? Because eros has this tendency to penetrate further. And if truth is something that's infinitely penetrable, rather than just kind of horizontally infinite, in terms of sort of perspectives around a circle, then it's exactly eros, which is what opens it. And that view of truth and reality does not posit truth and reality as what is as what is independent of the observer, independent of observing. It recognizes the profound participation of the soul in creating, discovering what is disclosed, creating slash discovering what is disclosed. To me, this is an interesting thing, and perhaps it can be developed, this idea of eros as having actually ontological value, more significant and powerful epistemological ontological value. So the theologian and philosopher John Milbank, I'm just starting to get to know his work and I find it very fascinating, very fascinating some of the overlaps and common areas, common desires as well between his work in the, really the, what they call radical orthodoxy movement, Catholic theology. I find it very interesting, those overlaps only know his work a little bit and there's a famous book he wrote, Theology and Social Theory, which I've just picked up and I haven't got very far on it at all, I was just actually on the preface, it's a preface to the second edition, and he wrote this, The Neheulistic Vision, which is what he means by this sort of flat purposeless cosmos of scientism, scientific materialism. The Neheulistic Vision makes its conclusions from a cold reason that disallows to the moods of eros, anxiety, boredom, trust, poetic response, faith, hope, charity and so forth, an ontologically disclosive status. And just what I was saying before, it's like affect is from the start ruled out of any definition of truth. So the mood, the affect of eros, anxiety, boredom, trust, poetic response, faith, hope, charity and so forth are disallowed any ontologically disclosive status. They don't tell you in other words anything, they don't open for us any knowledge about anything that's real, ontologically disclosive. But if our ontology admits a category of the real which yet includes our participation and creativity, our poetic response as well, then eros and secondarily, you know, other emotions, emotions like those Milbank listed above, or as I just mentioned, eros does disclose or open up to us the truth, or we could say truths or truth as a journey into truth, infinitely penetrable truth, as I explained. To me this is really, really interesting. Second point in the scientific methods sort of starting points and then what was really axiomatic in terms of methodology of approach but then became, you know, then actually spread from methodological technique or process to assumption about reality and unquestioned assumption about reality. Second one, apart from letting go the ruling out of affect and desire, truth is only what is observed in the absence of affect and desire. Of course this has been questioned from other directions as well but a second, erm, I first came across in reading Catherine Pickstock, she has a book called After Writing, it's found quite a difficult read, the language, but she's a colleague I think of John Milbank and she makes the point in her book After Writing that Descartes, who was of course one of the founders of the scientific method, defined reality as that which is clear and discrete and easily comprehended by the mind. Reality is defined as that which is clear, discrete and easily comprehended by the mind. Now that definition or delineation of objects to be investigated then says, okay what is reality? It's this, it's what's clear, discrete and easily comprehended by mind. That's what we should investigate, we should just forget about everything else because it doesn't, it's not, it's not real. We want to investigate the real, that's what science is. So that definition or delineation of objects to be investigated, as I said, came then itself to be taken as a truth. Initially it was just these are the objects we're going to investigate, the ones that are clear, discrete and easily comprehended by the mind, but then at some point it came to be this is what is true. It was taken itself as a truth. Anything that did not fit that definition of being clear, discrete and easily comprehended by the mind was regarded as untrue, unreal and unworthy of attention. Now you can see again in, if someone in quantum physics for example, or in relativistic physics, if someone tries to, tries to say, well the really simple things, the really clear, discrete things and then easily comprehended are these little billiard balls of basic particles or things like space and time. The time is newton to find absolute space, absolute time. It's just kind of there, a big empty space, not doing anything, not affected by anything and time just flows, absolute time. And these little billiard balls are pretty much the simplest, most discrete, clear things that they are. They're very easy to understand. It's just a little billiard ball. You can't, something you can't chop further, chop up further. But again starting from that view, from Descartes, quantum physics has just then, if you ask someone what really is an electron, you better have a lot of patience and a good bladder because we don't know. And the answer is definitely not simple. It's definitely not something that's either clear or discrete or easily comprehended by the mind. So the very starting premise of a mode of investigation here became a definition of truth and when the mode of investigation, so the scientific method, continued along those lines, it just completely decimated its very starting point and that definition. But for our purposes, I want to say again something about Eros in relationship to ontology and the ontological value and place potentially of Eros, epistemological and ontological value in place of Eros. Because Eros, when allowed to stimulate the soul making dynamic, and that's what we again, that's what we mean by Eros in its bigger definition, its larger definition, Eros will open up exactly what does not fit inside Descartes definition. Here's this object and if I, if there's Eros for it in relationship to it, that object, that object begins to become to us more mysterious, less comprehensible, because unfathomable, becomes unfathomable, it becomes not discrete, because it possesses dimensionality, shading into divinity, it possesses soft and elastic edges, it becomes polyaspected and complex rather than single and simple. So again, it's Eros that opens up exactly, or that bursts open Descartes definition in much the same way as physics has done. It's interesting too, and I am just picking up on just one of those words in the little quote from John Milbank. Noted the word boredom there, which I found was interesting, so you tend to think, oh well that's not a very productive or creative affect or emotion. So I don't know quite what he meant, but it was there sort of as a in a list of affects with truth-indicating power, truth-indicating power with potentially ontological, disclosive status, or rather actually all he was saying in that quote was that it had been ruled out, but by implication might it be there, even boredom. Might our boredom with, for example, the sort of typical common insistence on the sort of hegemony of the truth of a flat, flatly materialist cosmos, might our boredom with that idea, a boredom with this insistence on this is the existential reality of things, a boredom with the sort of little billiard ball idea of matter and now even of mind, a boredom with reductionist materialism. Might our boredom at those views, and those views being inundated, surrounded by those views, and being inflicted and oppressed by them, might our boredom be a feeling to trust, telling us that something in that picture is not right, not true. So I don't know what Milbank meant, but that's something I was wondering. So boredom as a valid affective and effective indicator of truth, and truth in inverted commas if we have this more open idea of what truth is. Actually just lingering with that, if we, if we, again, if we do conceive of truth, and again, I feel like I want to put it in inverted commas, but truth, conceive more as a process, a journey, a deepening and opening that is never ending. If we conceive it that way, and if it is eros above or as much as anything else which drives that journey and reveals or opens truth because of the eros-psychologous dynamic, then the discoveries on the way are still valid as partial provisional truths. They may be partial truths, but they're provisional truths. And so we see parallels to that in science. Again, some of this overlaps with things I said on the full parables series. So just as in the history of science, Newton's laws of mechanics and gravitation, for example, will function, they do function very well to predict outcomes within a limited range, within a limited range of accuracy, but also of you know, the phenomena that we're dealing with. Newton's laws function, you know, very well to predict outcomes. It was Newton's laws that enable us to land a rocket on the moon. It was very complicated mathematics, working that out. And even when they sent a probe to, I can't remember where it was, Jupiter or Neptune, you know, it was tremendous accuracy of prediction. It was all coming basically from Newtonian mathematics and equations. It functions very well to predict outcomes. How this cannonball will fly exactly where this tennis ball will land. How high it will go, whatever. Within a limited range. And because of that, because they predicted outcomes so well for so long before, there's stuff that didn't fit, they seemed for so long, absolutely true, because they functioned so well to predict outcomes. But in fact, Newton's laws are only, does the word law qualify anymore? They're only in fact, partially or provisionally true. They've been superseded by Einstein's general relative, special general relativity theories, the conceptions and the equations. And so there's something in science where we see this in what we can call provisional truth. It's not like Newton's laws are kind of completely not true or irrelevant, or they don't are not completely adequate to a certain level. Depends what we want to do. And depends also not just what we want to do or want to calculate or want to figure out or explain, but also depends on what our idea of truth is. But we see a similar thing in Dharma, so that the relative truth of dependent fabrication, dependent unfabricating, it still functions. And from its basis, from an understanding of, yes, if there's clinging, if there's aversion, if there's selfing to something, it will fabricate more. If, to the degree that I let go of clinging, let go of aversion, let go of unfabricating, let go of delusion, avicya, there will be unfabricating. So from the basis of that relative truth, we can accurately predict, as I was sharing recently, the fact of, yeah, when you direct meta at phenomena, not looking elsewhere, I'm keeping this phenomenon in my attention, but directing meta and compassion right at it as I pay attention to it, and the phenomenon fades. Or, same thing as I mentioned yesterday, if I view something as I'm paying attention to it, or any of the other three characteristics, there'll be some degree of fading. Even though fabrication and dependent origination, as we would conventionally understand them, to be operating between separable phenomena, this gives rise to that, dependent on this, comes this, etc. As if they're separable and real entities phenomena. That whole view of fabrication and dependent arising is not ultimately true. This is fabricated by the mind. Self is fabricated by clinging, or this link in dependent origination is dependent on that link of dependent origination, the 12 links, and they're separable, kind of real entities. That's not actually ultimately true. But the relative truth of dependent fabrication and dependent on fabricating still functions, just as Newton's law still functions. They have a provisional truth to them. And impermanent as well is a provisional truth. It's a relative or conventional truth. If ultimately neither impermanent nor permanent is true of anything, as Nagarjuna points out, because time is empty. Other reasons too. So there's a parallel here and in these three domains, science, classical Dharma, but also when we get into soul making. And the whole idea that conventional truths, the truths that open up through science, through the conventional truths of classical Dharma and the conventional truths of what we encounter in soul making, these are provisional truths. They're provisional truths, but we can still have a journey, a directionality, a sort of infinite penetrability into truth in the bigger sense. So if we stay with this idea of conventional truth, something else I want to point out is that very easily conventional truths are assumed real. So that's why I say conventional truths are provisional truths. Conventional truths are provisional truths. It doesn't mean they're worthless. It doesn't mean they don't have a place. It doesn't mean they can't be relied on. Cause and effect reliably. If I drop something heavy on my head, it'll... It's actually not such a good example, but... Cause and effect. Conventional truth still functions. It's a provisional truth. Provisional truths can still be relied upon to a certain extent within certain provisos, within certain limits. Conventional truths are then usually assumed to be real in all kinds of ways. Conventional truths are typically assumed to be real. They're assumed to be ultimate truths. So that's really one thing to be very, very important, very, very aware of and to be concerned with. And it's something I've talked so much about and written about. There's a second thing, which is also important. I've also mentioned it before, but it's really worth emphasizing again, and maybe with a slightly different illustration and angle. When we assume or when we adopt a conventional truth, one question is, is it real? Is it ultimately real or is it just a conventional provisional truth? But a second question is, what does the adoption of this conventional truth lead to? When I assume and conceive and look in the terms of this conventional truth, this provisional truth, what does it open up for me? And what does it close for me? What does it bar from my experience, from my understanding, from my journey, from my life and practice? So let me give an example. Recently I taught the genre retreat at Guy House and I am very, very ill, probably in the last stages of my life, and with a lot of pain and experimenting with, you know, the doctors are experimenting trying to find the right medication for pain, sometimes just making me foggy and affecting me in all kinds of ways, and tired and other times really not touching the pain very much. There's a lot of pain, there's a lot of difficulty, there's not a lot of energy, a lot of my time is spent struggling with my digestion or on the toilet or whatever. And I managed, with the help of the angels I think, to teach a 23-day retreat or whatever it was just recently at Guy House, genre retreat, and several people said or wrote to me something like, your willpower is amazing, wow you have such willpower. But, and I, you know, I appreciate the affection and the sort of, I guess what's the kind of compliment there, but I want to just linger on this, although it sounds anal and says, I just want to linger on this, because if a person is conceiving of that, this is what a dying person is choosing to do, and then somehow able to sustain over time, teaching every day for hours, despite all the other challenges. And if one conceives of that as a result of willpower, what's that actually implying? Willpower to me implies, or the meaning of what is willpower, will, what is the will, is I don't know, a faculty of the ego or the self that can decide autonomously to do or not to do something arbitrary. In other words, what it decides to do or not do is irrelevant. You understand, it's just a matter of something called willpower. The ability, the capacity, is purely a matter of the strength and steadiness of something called will. What about love? What about love of something? What about heroes again? Does that have no place in why something is possible? Why something is sustainable? What about the call, the calling, or the wish of the demon? What about a sense of duty, a sense that honoring the demands of the angel is more important, more beautiful, more sacred than living comfortably, or longer even, or living with pleasant vedana, or at least minimally unpleasant vedana? Of course, even before we get talking about heroes and angels and soul duty and love and all that, what about just other factors like the capacity to see in different ways the emptiness of dukkha, the emptiness of difficulty? What about qualities like patience? Patience to stay with what's difficult, what we call forbearance. It's one of the six paramese in Nama. I think it's one of the six paramese that Buddha alluded to, certainly one of the ten paramese of Mahayana. So there's a whole level that we could just look at in terms of classical Buddha Dharma teachings that's actually involved, rather than just simplify into this thing called will. But what I want to emphasize more is, what about other dimensions of being? Aspects of our psychology, love, Eros, again, the calling of the Daemon, the sense of duty, the demands of the angel, and the sense of that being more important than anything else in life. The honoring of that. That's more important, more beautiful, more sacred, as I said, than comfort or minimizing unpleasant vedness, etc. And if such a person is thinking in this way that doesn't include love, Eros, the demands of the angel, the phenomenological fact of the call or the wish of the Daemon, or the sense of the duty to the angel. If they are thinking that without any of that, and if they are on top of that explicitly or even subtly implicitly comparing, let's say, themselves and their willpower to mind, and judging mind, again, I want to put that in inverted commas because I don't think of it in terms of willpower, really, and they're judging mind to be more, then they may be simply rather not understanding their own cycle, let alone my psychology, their own psychology, fully or finely or accurately or carefully enough. So their, what seems like to them, perhaps their relative absence of, or their relatively weak willpower, is really a kind of, let's say, really, because otherwise they would mention it, otherwise it would be included in how they assessed this, what seems to them, something quite remarkable, this feat of teaching through all that. Their relative absence of something called willpower, relatively weak willpower, is really an absence of connection with their Daemon, or their angel, a blocking, perhaps, somehow of that connection and of their Eros, and an inability to sense themselves as image and sense their lives with soul. So I may come back to this because all this actually bears on questions of ethics, on ethical choices. It applies, let's say, to ethical choices and to our individual ethos, individual character. All right, we may come back to this in another talk. Now, of course, it's not that someone who has the kind of an erotic relationship with a calling or project or a creative project or an offering that they want to give or a service that they want to do. It's not that someone who has a sense of Eros and duty to the angel and demands of the Daemon and all that love. It's not that they will always feel that way. They always feel filled with love and Eros and the juiciness of all that. So, of course, there will be times when the sense of calling of love, Eros, is not there or is much diminished. And then there may be, at those times, a reliance on something we could call will or resolution or discipline or something. Actually, I'm going to come back to those words. But it's like parenting or being in a long-term relationship. You know, deep down, that you love something, and that you're totally committed to it. And then it's meaningful and important. You know that even at the times you are not, and it's that knowledge that sustains. It's not simple willpower. It's a knowledge of the soul depth of something. Even at the time, you're not feeling that love or Eros so directly. So, at the risk, considerable risk probably, of sounding anal and maybe crossing the line into some kind of anality about words and the words people use. If someone had said to me, or if they'd used the word discipline, on the other hand, rather than will, because will just means, from the Latin, just means I want something. It's just to stay with the intention. Discipline, on the other hand, is related to the word disciple and from the Latin disciplines, which means teaching or disciples, which is a pupil, discarees, is to learn in Latin. If a person uses that word, or if I think about it in those terms, as a discipline involved in staying steady and showing up and offering that despite everything, all the challenges, discipline implies that it's not self-enclosed. It's not self-deciding. It's not totally self-instigating and self-actualising as the word will is. We now commonly understand actually both words, will and discipline. But going more into the root of the word discipline, it could open out a different sense. It implies a relationship, at least as etymology implies a relationship, an imaginal relationship perhaps, the image of offering something, the image of being a servant, doing one's duty, the image of what one wants to offer, the image of the retreat, the image of the teachings, the image of passing something on. The word discipline, in its more etymological meaning, invokes, implies, involves relationship, can become imaginal relationship, and humility. You have to be humble to learn from this person or that person or this thing or that event or situation or this experience. I have to be humble. Something has to be greater than me, the one who teaches, the thing that teaches me. And it implies, in all that, there is implied an other and that can become an erotic imaginal other. So it's possible that the whole thing becomes an imaginal constellation. So if we're talking about ethics and what it takes to stay true to one's ethics, and really stand firm courageously, unmovingly, unwaveringly, it may be that there's an image of that virtue, as we touched on in the Seer and Soul talks on the Four Parables Retreat course, that the virtue itself has become image, has become ideational, imaginal, and there's other there, and I'm an erotic imaginal relationship with that other, I'm a disciplus and humble in relation to that other. But it also might be, like I said, a work project, a certain duty, a creative art project. Etienne Surya talks about the angel of the work, where the disciple of the angel of the work, perhaps, or just opening up words now, just to get a fuller sense of what can be involved here when things are difficult, when things are challenging, when we want, or how our sense of things can be extended. Put it that way, and not shrunken and amputated to fit into narrow and flat psychologies and philosophies. So the word discipline could potentially, if we took it as etymology, open up more. Another word is resolve. So a person could have used the word resolve, oh, you have such incredible resolve. Again, we typically hear these words, discipline, resolve, etc., just as we hear the word will as something totally self-instigated, self-initiated, self-sustaining, self-actualizing. But the word resolve is from, again, Latin, re solveri, which means re again, and solver is to loosen, to loosen again. And solveri means to loosen, to release, but one of its means is to free from debt. So to free from debt again. So what might it mean? To free from debt to the angel again, because the angel's demands are infinite, never-ending. So I honour the angel by trying as best as I can to discern what my duty is and to carry that out as best as I can. And it will be not an exact copy of whatever the image is or whatever the angel seems to be completely. I will always fall short. We've talked about this before. But there's, in that resolve, there is I'm freeing myself from debt because I'm paying my debt. Then I'm freed from that debt, the debt to the angel, to the demon, the duty. And as I said, re again, because it will be, it will never end. And there's another duty and the angel is always out ahead. Or again, if we again want to open up the potential meanings here, someone might have used the word sacrifice. I think someone did. And that means in Latin sacri fice, fice is to make, and sacri is related to sacred, holy, to make holy or sacred. So to me that would fit better. Now this isn't about me, sort of sacrifice, oh it's like some kind of grandiose thing about Rob or whatever. Any of it. I really want to point, again, I want to point something out about what I started with here was the general point about what conventional truths are we adopting? What do they lead to? The conventional truths that we adopt, the provisional truths that we adopt, in this case about psychology, what do they lead to? What do they open up? What do they limit? If someone thinks in terms of certain ways, in terms of words like will, discipline, resolve, thinks of them as being self-enclosed, self-instigating, etc. Sacrifice, it's already, hopefully it's already got the hint of another level in it, because it's already got the implication of making something holy or sacred, but it can lose that, has lost that a lot in our culture. So this isn't about me, I want to open up something about in the ways that we tend to think about our psychology, about what drives us, about what we're doing, about what makes certain things possible or not. The question is what do these ideas, what are the truths we are grasping at and holding onto, or even just adopting, open up or not? Where do they take us? So if we go with the etymology of sacrifice, making holy, making sacred, what's holy? What's sacred here? Again, the angel and the angel of the work. Very often, most of the time these days when a teacher have an image of not just contemporary practitioners and students, but an image of the unknown future practitioners, the unknown, they will never be known to me, they're in the future, elsewhere in space, elsewhere in time. The sun guy in the future becomes a sacred, imaginal other to me, is sensed as sacred. And to somehow refract that angel of the work into this plane of existence, let's say. To refract that is sacred. To do and to make work for that is a doing for what is sacred, vijay doing, sacri, sacred, sacrifice, doing for what is sacred, and feel it as a making sacred. So again, in such a, if we're so used to certain psychologies, all this may sound pompous or grandiose, and of course there's that danger. The ego gets hold of it, and it's reified, and all this other stuff, but if we hold it in the right way, in the soul-making way, actually it opens up dimensions and distances and perspectives and possibilities, where then fueled by and supported by something very different than my will. And this kind of flatly conceived, mechanistic model of psychology. Even when I said earlier, and it's important to really understand this, you know, there will be times, of course there's times, of course there's times when one doesn't have the sense of the other, of the calling, of the Eros, of the love, and then one perhaps is in a mode of like just, okay, I've just got to get through this, or the sense of the other, the love, the Eros, the image is much diminished. But then we have this other word, commitment, in English, and again it's like long-term relationship or parenting, one's committed, and again, from the Latin, comitery, which means to put together or to join, to join, you make a commitment, you join, but what are we joining here? Because that's something I'm joining with my partner, or I'm a commitment to my children, or their education, or they are upbringing, whatever it is, their, you know, their safety. But we could also say, what are we joining? I'm in those times when it does feel flat and like a drudge, because I'm not so seeing with a sense of soul, and there isn't the depth and the Eros and the calling and the love, there's not the sense of it in that moment. What are we joining? We're joining that very flat drudgery to the knowledge of the holy. Like I said, we, in long-term, you're resting on that knowledge in long-term commitments, long-term relationships, or parenting, whatever it is, and we could say we're joining this that feels like flat drudgery, we're joining it to the holy, or we're joining the holy to the flat drudgery. It's joined like by an umbilical cord, and it's fed by that knowledge and by that sense. After they also, you know, even just this morning, I felt really, I don't know if it's some of the drugs they're giving me at the moment, some of the medication or what it is, but I'm so tired, so lacking in mental energy, etc. So sleepy, really. How am I going to do these talks later on? How am I going to do that? And just with very, what seemed like very, very reduced mental capacity sitting in sort of attempt at meditation, then at some point, you know, I read the ideas, these very ideas I'm talking about today, the ideas that I want to communicate became sensed also as angels. Yes, the idea became erotic, imaginal, other, and angelic. They want to be communicated. These ideas, some of the things I've been talking about today, want to be communicated. Again, there's a parallel with the notion of the ideational imaginal, which I introduced on the Four Parables Retreat. So the ideas then are sensed with soul, and they become images, they become imaginal images. Then even when my mind feels really so tired, so foggy, so sleepy, so lacking in energy and brightness, I can sense as other, there's no, as other than me, I can sense their energy, these idea angels, these angel ideas. I can sense as other their energy, their brightness, their desire and heroes to be made manifest. And somehow, somehow I can trust their heroes will enable that manifestation. So, you know, this question, what does a conventional truth that I'm adopting, what does it deliver? Where does it take me? What does it open up? What does it close? And the answer is, selves and others and worlds and cosmoses depend on the conventional truths I entertain or adopt. And much more powerfully when I assume they're real, it might limit certain avenues, certain whole realms of opening and being, possibility, conception, all of it. So, in Willpower versus Eros or Daemon, to me, it's a relative, I mean, it's a helpful psychological notion. Psychological theories, assumptions, psychological realities, it's a helpful idea. But compared with Eros and Daemon, it's very much less rich. And if we just have notions of willpower, we're actually, again, I think, missing part of our psychology. We're totally not seeing part of our psychology. And we could even go further and try and reduce willpower, you know, in this kind of currents of reductions and in psychology that exist. And you could try and reduce willpower to a kind of quasi-electronic circuit of intentions and vedana. And then the question is whether the reactions to vedana, either unpleasant vedana or pleasant vedana that are not, you know, associated with what it is that your intention has set out to do. Someone said, oh, the pleasant vedana of, you know, having a nice long rest when I could be up preparing talks or interviewing or whatever. The pleasant vedana of eating something that I know might be pleasant while it's in my mouth, but then will later be difficult in my digestive system, which may affect my capacity to teach, etc. One could try and reduce willpower to this idea of a sort of quasi-electronic circle of intentions moving like little long electronic circuits and vedana. And then the question is whether the reactions to the vedana overpower or deflect the intention. And you've got a series of little gates in the circuit and 1001100010001, you know, whatever. And it depends on each electronic circuit junction, whether reaction has overpowered or deflected or has the intention stayed true to its course. And one can have a neurological model that's something along the line, probably a lot more complex or something along the lines of that. Does that kind of reductionist explanation, does it constitute for us an understanding? What does it do to our lives? Does it enrich our lives? I mean, it might help, you know, at times to frame our process, our experience, our practice in those kinds of ways. So here's an intention, here's a vedana arising, careful with the reaction, etc. Can it be taken care of so it doesn't deflect the intention from its course or overpower it? But that's only one conceptual framework, one way of looking, a conceptual framework, let's say. And the important thing I want to say right now is it misses so much else out. Even if we think and practice that way, and even if through thinking and practice in that way, we're able to better stay with an intention despite many incidents of that intention encountering unpleasant vedana or pleasant vedana, pulling it away or thoughts and beliefs that may deflect it. Even if we're able to do that, so that we're able to get to do what was important or meaningful for us, because our intentions say it stays steady, such a framework or conceptual framework does nothing then to illuminate what actually is meaningful to us. Does nothing to illuminate meaningfulness itself? What is meaningfulness in such a, how am I going to explain meaningfulness in terms of these neural circuits and gates shutting or opening or neurotransmitters being secreted from one neuron to another or movement of atoms and molecules across a membrane or electrons? We'll have to reduce it again other than meaningfulness, and what is meaningful is just another pleasant vedana. It's just another one or zero or whatever, or even meaningfulness that just becomes, yes, the meaningfulness node of the circuit. It's just another one or zero or whatever on the kind of binary circuit computer of the model of the brain. The mind is such a poor and impoverishing psychology. Yes, to a certain extent it might be useful in terms of we can adapt that kind of thinking to a way of thinking about mindfulness, but even then it leaves so much out. It's poor and it's impoverishing as a psychology. And all this becomes really important when we talk about ethics, and I hope to do so in a few days to talk more about ethics, and virtues, and reductionist, behaviorist explanations that try to reduce our notions of ethics or virtues and try to kind of decimate them really into a more reductive and behaviorist notion. So Charles Taylor has written about this several times, a Canadian philosopher. I think he's still alive. He's pretty old now. One of the things he says in a book called Sources Himself, he says it elsewhere as well, but is that explanations like that actually end up being of, he says, no use, I would say, almost no use for a person living life. Certainly when it comes to ethics and virtues, they're no use for a person living life. They leave out, he says, actually indispensable ideas and terms. Again, this is actually quite pernicious because, again, we tend to think, well, a real understanding, a real explanation of, let's say, ethical behavior or feelings about virtues or what's really going on when we're ethical or virtuous or whatever, what's really going on in terms of will and that sort of thing. It must be, a real explanation must be based in realities, and the only realities are the realities that natural science or basically physics has decided are real. In other words, atoms, electrons, neutrons, protons and all the rest of it. Everything else is not really real. Try and explain everything from using those constituents. Many problems with that I've gone into already here in this talk and in other talks, but the point he makes is that for human beings, in a cosmos where there are human beings, there are attempts at reductionist and, I'd say, purely neurological, for example, explanations, which anyway always fall short of actually explaining anything. For example, they don't explain consciousness or mind from matter. They haven't yet, and I don't think they ever will. They actually fall short, but part of that, the four human beings, in a cosmos where there are human beings, such attempts, purely neurological, purely reductionist, so-called explanations, don't actually form the best account. The best account means what makes sense of things, what do I need to use as a human being in order to make sense of things, in order to navigate the world of ethical choices. I use the term ethical choices in a very wide sense to include things like, here is something that feels important to me, and there's a lot of reasons why I could decide not to do it, and all these other challenging considerations. That's ethos, ethics as well. They're provisional truths, but they're not necessarily the best accounts, because they're not the accounts I cannot talk in those terms and explain to myself in those terms of reductionist neurology in a way that makes sense to me of the choices I need to make, and of what will help me make those choices, and help me to carry them out and stay steady, etc. So just as certain notions or models in physics, what's called the standard model of particle physics, seem to be for now, that's actually hitting some serious problems, but seem to be for now, for us the best account we can manage of physical reality. When we get to the human reality, they're not the best account anymore, they're simply not the best account. All right, so this question, this inquiry, really important, so crucial. What does this conventional truth that I'm holding, that I'm adopting, I'm even just entertaining, what does it lead me to, what does it bring, what are its consequences for my experience, for my sense of things, for my sense of self and world, other? There's that question, and there's the question, am I assuming it's real? Am I actually assuming a conventional truth is an ultimate truth? Is something real? This idea, this model, this notion is actually a reality, am I assuming that? So two questions here. Okay, so we need to be careful with assumptions, but we also need to be careful with conclusions. So sometimes we have a notion and a model, and it does function in the way that good science functions, whether theory or law, equation, in science works as a provisional truth. It works, as we said, because it has predictive power, because that notion enables you to predict something happening or occurring or unfolding, if this is the case, that otherwise you wouldn't have been able to predict. So it has predictive power. So an example, you know, from the soul making logos, from the soul making domino logos would be the example that we can predict, we can expect that unless we block the soul making dynamic, unless we block the Eros, block or psyche or logos is blocked in some way, we can expect that the natural process of the soul making dynamic will begin to involve not just the imaginal object, but also the self becoming imaginal, and then also the world becoming imaginary, some kind of cosmic oasis. Well, if we start with the self and other and world or whatever, this spreading to include self, other world and in fact, and also Eros, as we've discussed many times, self, other world, Eros become imaginal, they become infused with the matter become infected, drawn in, involved, caught up in the whole soul making, become imaginary, that's a prediction that we can make. So we expect that to it bears out. In our practice, we can notice it in interviews, you can notice it, you can expect it, you can look for it. If it's not happening, it's pointing to something being blocked. And then the question is, okay, where is it blocked? That would be an example of a conventional truth or conventional notion that has only a conventional truth, still having predictive power and therefore being, you know, a useful provisional truth, a useful provisional tool, a useful notion, or the whole notion of the soul making dynamic itself, that Eros will ignite that whole dynamic so that psyche, Eros in seeking more, and the populace in Eros in seeking more will open up more beyonds in psyche, more images, more dimensions, more aspects. So more will be perceived and that will inflame Eros even more. And the whole process opens up even more until it pushes on logos. And I'm describing it in one order, there's many possible permutations of how it opens. Pushing on logos and then the ideation changes, either is stretched or shattered. And all that opens up the sense of the beloved other even more, there's even more Eros, so the Eros psyche logos dynamic will work like that. And all these, both of these predictions that self, other, world Eros become the natural and that the Eros psyche logos will galvanize each other, deepen, widen, open, complexify each other. Both of those predictions come from the very basic sort of provisional truth or notion or theory, soul loves soul making, soul loves soul making. Just that simple kind of axiom, how it leads to these other level of notions, is all provisional truth, you could say, but there's predictive power in provisional truth. Again, unless they're blocked, but in that case it points to, aha, okay, where's the block? And you can find the block, perhaps unblock it, and then you see the process happening as predicted. So that's an example of a provisional truth being used to make valid, helpful conclusions through its predictive power. But careful with this. Some while ago, well in fact many times people, and my own experience as well, is the case that two or more people find that they've independently received or arrived at or opened to the same or very similar images. Either of, you know, both have similar images of one person in a diet, both have similar images of one person in a diet, but they've arrived at them independently. So it can happen in all kinds of ways, but it's not that they were one person shared an image with the other and described it, and then the other person got a sense of the image, they arrived at them kind of separately, but the people themselves were, you know, connected in some soul-making relationship. And then careful of what does that imply? So here's an image that's shared, and one of the perhaps tempting conclusions from the fact that two or more people spontaneously share the same or a similar image could be that the image itself, its content, should be reified. Now because we've arrived at this independently, it must mean there's something true about this image, true in the sense of real. It doesn't need to imply that, it doesn't automatically imply that. So careful about conclusions as well. Careful about assumptions, but careful about conclusions as well. It may imply this fact that, you know, that two or more people independently share the same or very similar image, may imply, or it's more likely that it implies, or suggests something like the fact that the citta, the mind or the soul or consciousness, is not as bound by, and not as bound to, the individual physical organism as we typically assume in our modern culture. You understand? So there's two conclusions there, and to me the second is the more justifiable conclusion, or conclusion, you know, step towards a conclusion. It suggests that more than a reification of images. So the imaginal middle way doesn't apply to the latter conclusion, or the suggestion that maybe minds are not really just bound up and end with our skin, they're bound up with my neurons, my brain, bound to and by individual physical organisms we tend to assume so easily in our modern culture. So that may be suggesting that that's, that may be a fact of conventional provisional truth that is being suggested there. The imaginal middle way doesn't apply, because I'm not talking about images, I'm talking about the nature of the citta and the capacities of the citta, boundaries of the citta. The imaginal middle way should still apply to the image in soul making of us anyway. So it applies still to the image, even though they've both been, arrived at, independently sharing the same image or a similar image. But imaginal middle way doesn't apply to questions about where is the boundary of the mind here, is it just as we tend to think within the physical organism. So sometimes things like this happen, and many things happen, and we have to, in soul making practice, all kinds of things happen, and it's extremely interesting, but careful of our sort of logical process and what we tend to think, something, what the conclusions are, what's suggested by some experience that would happen. Especially something like that, because this, you know, one of the things in our culture that, one of the sort of ontological and epistemological assumptions in our culture that's pretty entrenched is that if a perception is socially agreed upon, in other words, if it's not just me perceiving something, and you can't perceive it, if we, you and I, excuse me, and another person perceive it, perceive the same thing, then that social agreement of a perception tends to validate the reality of that perception for us. That's one of our epistemologies, that we need to socially agree on something for it to be real, and anything that isn't socially agreed upon is not regarded as real. So that's one of our received criteria for what is real and what constitutes that knowledge of the real. It's received and usually unquestioned epistemology, ontology, so it can be tricky, because we're sharing an image spontaneously, we tend to think, well, it must be real, because that's one of the criteria we tend to use for deciding what counts as real. So just take this point a little further about assumptions and conclusions and conventional truths, you know, the question of what do they lead to? What am I assuming? What am I concluding? What conventional truths am I adopting or clinging to? And what does that lead to? So we've talked about something very different now and talk about the nature of time, for example. You read something or explain something briefly. So going back centuries and centuries, millennia, really, where there were two views of time, two persistent views of time we can trace through the centuries in Western and I think also in Asian thought and Eastern thought. One of them is really that time is something real, it's essentially it's a substance, like Newton's idea. The other though is time is essentially the product of the soul, it's something that the soul kind of creates, let's say, or creates discovers. The second point of view, that time is a product of the soul, was the view of Plotinus, who was one of the, or perhaps, whose regarder is the founder of Neo-Platonism, he probably would regard himself just as a Plotinus, but anyway. And he held that point of view and his explanation for it is that the soul is unable to kind of grasp the contents of intelligence. I have to explain what that word intelligence means in this context. Intelligence means, we could say, the attributes of Buddha nature, or the attributes of divinity, or the attributes of the ultimate one, the angelic essences, you could say. The soul is unable to grasp the contents of that plerima of intelligences, those attributes of divinity. In other words, here you have Buddha nature, you have God, or you have the ultimate one. And just as in Dharmakaya, we could say the attributes of the Dharmakaya, there's a kind of transcendent beyond being and non-being kind of unity. And then there's another level where the attributes of the Dharmakaya, love and compassion and power and lots of other aspects, become kind of manifest or visible at a level of reality before they become physically manifest. So there's a way that this Dharmakaya, for example, is, if we use Buddhist language, can be conceived as totally beyond any attributes, totally beyond even the attribute of being or non-being or one or nothing or many. And then another level where it's where one can focus on the attributes of God, the names of God, the attributes of the Dharmakaya. So the soul is not able to kind of grasp all that in one kind of go, in one indivisible act. So instead, it must kind of do it one by one or perhaps in groups. And it must come into contact with and behold and get to know and open to and get to love and practice manifesting those aspects of the divinity of the Dharmakaya, let's say several at a time, can't do it all at once, maybe one by one, maybe several at a time. But in so doing, it engenders time and produces the sensible world as a temporal world. So soul here really means world soul. So these are kind of hierarchies of reality where soul, world soul engenders time. Time is a product of the soul because of its need to kind of know and manifest those attributes of the transcendent divine. But its inability to do so in one kind of gulp, in one kind of gestalt. So it does so bit by bit or aspect by aspect, one by one or several at a time. And in doing so engenders time and also the sensible temporal world that we live in. The world soul and our soul as part of or as mimicking the world soul. It's a very different than an idea of time as absolute time as Newton would have it independently existing time. Now in a very different way, the whole ways of looking approach and inquiry into emptiness, and I talked about before and I outlined seeing freeze in other places, the phenomenological approach to emptiness and dependent arising comes to similar kinds of conclusions. That time is a dependent arising, dependent on the way of looking. Even time, even something so basic has arrived at. Here we have a very metaphysical, or it sounds like a sort of arbitrary metaphysical theory. I doubt that it was. I think it was probably as much something that came out of philosophical thinking as much as it was something that came out of meditative exploration, I'm guessing for Plotinus and others. And in seeing freeze and this phenomenological approach, ways of looking approach to emptiness and dependent arising, you have something that comes out of meditation and then realizes time is empty and time, sense of time is a dependent arising. And then again, we said in recent years in quantum physics, there's also, as I mentioned earlier, this sense that perhaps time is not a fundamental reality, it's an emergent reality, and a quantum reality as such is dependent on the observer. So even within Neoplatonism, by the way, there were different points of view. Plotinus had that point of view, the umbilicus had a different point of view, more substantial view of time, apparently. Alexander Aphrodysius, who was actually a commentator on Aristotle, but he said, humans are poetics of time, the creators, the poetic creators of time. Time is part of our poasis, and we talk about cosmopoasis. We also think it's a poasis of time. So it's the subjectivity of time as itself primary ontological reality, as opposed to the objective existence of time. But what I want to ask again is if time has no ultimately real existence, no inherent existence independent of the soul of the observer, what does that imply? What does it lead to? And what does it imply for liberation? What kind of liberation does such an insight bring? What kind of, what scope does it mean for what liberation means and involves? What also does it mean for soul making? What does it mean for psychological healing? It tends so much to think of the past cause this difficulty in the present. Time moves that way, and it's kind of inexorable reality to time and the placement of things and the direction of causality, etc. So what does it mean then for psychological healing? In this question, what we hold on to, what we adopt, what we grasp, in terms of assumptions, conclusions, and conventional provisional truths, what do they deliver? What do they open up for us? And what do they limit for us? So what becomes just a whole kind of way of approaching psychological healing and doors that might open up depths and areas of psychological healing that may not be reachable, possible, touchable through any other means, maybe opened up, for instance, just from a different metaphysic of time. A whole notion of healing and how healing might be or what it needs or what's involved, but also a notion of human being. If a notion of time is not of something ultimately real, independently existing, what does that mean for a human being? What does it mean about death? I'm hoping to come back to talk about perspectives on death, different perspectives on death, but we jump so easily into very simplistic notions, all of them rarefied around death and impermanence and time. And also of human beings, human beings, someone who's born and then dies, and that's it, whatever, or they live forever in heaven or hell or whatever it is, too simple, too rarefied. I mean, you know, again, valid conventionally, helpful conventionally, perhaps to a certain point, but provisional truths, maybe not the whole truth. Now, if you can see then, you can understand what gets blocked, what avenues, what openings, what experiences, perceptions, understandings, transformations become impossible if we're entrenched in the conventional view of time. For example, I was talking about thinking of ways of looking, practicing ways of looking, teaching ways of looking, but actually harbouring this idea of some fundamental basic sort of nebulous flow or flux to which we apply ways of looking and get this or that appearance of this or that object, but that basic flux being real and therefore and time with it being real. And what that then prevents us from opening to understanding, reaching, being touched by what vistas, what realms get prevented, how significant this is. But if time can also be opened up that way, conventional truths about time, different conventional truths about time can be adopted. What might that do? How might that open up for us areas and questions such as psychological healing and the nature of a human being and death, not to mention liberation and soul-making? So these are important questions, important realisations. Okay, we'll stop there for today. Thanks.

 Welcome everyone. What I would like to try to do, hope to be able to do in this short series of talks is to perhaps extend a little bit some of the lines of inquiry, some of the themes and threads from one of the recent series, the Four Circles for Parables of Stone and Light, and the themes of certainly of ethics. We would like to extend and explore a little bit that area, that whole domain, as well as opening up or looking at some more possibilities for imaginal practice or what imaginal practice and soul making might make possible for us as practices. Some other questions and reflections on ontology and epistemology and also on tradition and how we think of path and goal and awakening and all that. But I think I want to start, it makes sense to start talking about ontology, but in fact ontology questions and explorations of ontology, the theme of ontology we've woven throughout these talks. But I want to start a little bit with that. Ontology is, to say what I want to define very briefly, is, ontology is actually best for our purposes defined as the views and beliefs we have about what is real and what is not real and what kinds of reality or what kinds of beings, what kinds of being different things have. So a dream has a different kind of reality than what we perceive in waking consciousness we tend to assume. That's an ontology, it's an ontological view right there. So the views and beliefs about what is real, what is not real, what kind of reality and being different things have. And usually ontology is, the word is used in a sort of very philosophical context, it's a philosophical systems and sophisticated philosophical analysis. I mean to include all that, but the reason I'm defining it as views and beliefs is partly because, as I want to emphasize again and again, is that we're always within ontology. Whether we philosophise or not, whether we read those kinds of books, whether we think in a certain way or wonder in a certain way about what's real or not real, we always have views and beliefs and conceptual frameworks, conscious or unconscious, operating. So the words view and belief give much more sense of the sort of immediacy and inevitability of ontology in our lives and in our practice, in our experience. And particularly what I want to focus on today is emptiness and the ways of looking approach. So say a few more things about that. The ways of looking approach to emptiness, which is the bulk of what seeing the freeze is devoted to. The ways of looking approach to emptiness is quite unusual as an approach to emptiness and certainly as approach to dharma. The whole ways of looking approach to dharma is quite unusual. But it's also unusual as an approach to emptiness. And what I've come down to say is quite easy or quite possible, but actually quite easy and relatively common for it to be not quite understood in the correct way. People very understand we bring to that paradigm the ways of looking approach. We bring to that paradigm perhaps ideas, beliefs, formulations and frameworks that they've encountered elsewhere, read or heard or whatever, even within other Buddha dharma contexts, of course, and they bring all that to hearing or reading about the ways of looking approach to emptiness. And some of that other stuff comes in so that what they hear or read about the ways of looking approach is actually a little bit twisted or shaped or shaved even to conform to the ideas that they already have. It's a very normal human occurrence and human propensity, something we need to be aware of and take care of in any whatever it is we're talking about or trying to explain or trying to understand. So the ways of looking approach. I've gone into this elsewhere in great detail recently on the seminars, the online seminars. I think there was one, the second emptiness seminar there in the last series of 10 or 11. Any understanding? There's two key themes. One is ways of looking that it's not going to go into this now, just mentioning it. There's ways of looking that we as human beings can look at things in different ways, that we have a range there, possibility of flexibility there, possibility of extending that range. Ways of looking mean the whole, in any moment, how are we relating to something? What ideas, conceptions, assumptions, beliefs, reactions, tendencies, likes, dislikes, propensities, emphases, kinds of attention or areas of attention. All of that together makes up the way of looking in any moment. And we have the possibility as human beings to explore that consciously and really as they extend that range, play with it, discover new ways of looking, develop them, etc. So one concept is ways of looking. Second concept is fabrication. And one realizes that different ways of looking have different, if you like, amounts and kinds and levels of what we call clinging wrapped up in them. Clinging is a word that I use very elastically, meaning it means obviously what it tends to mean to most people, something very gross, really gripping onto something, not wanting to let go in a very obvious or even dramatic way, all the way down to something really, really subtle. So I've explained all this before, I'm not going to go into a lot of detail now. But different ways of looking have different amounts, kinds, levels of clinging to them. And that clinging turns out to be extremely important in determining what is fabricated in perception through the way of looking. In other words, a way of looking shapes, forms, fabricates what we then perceive. I look at something in this way, and that means I have that whole relationship with it, I see it, perceive it, sense it differently than when I look at it in another way. And one of the key constituents there of the way of looking is the clinging. Because depending on the clinging, the degree of fabrication, not just of how much suffering there is, fabrication of suffering, which of course is a key emphasis and inquiry in Buddhist practice, not just the fabrication of suffering, but also the fabrication of self, other, world, time, space, the whole show, the whole magic show of perception is dependent on the kinds, amounts and levels of clinging involved. And so really what the ways of looking approach is, is taking those two ideas, ways of looking and fabrication, maybe a third idea, clinging, as we just said, and exploring what that is and what it involves at different levels, what might it involve, and just exploring them and seeing what's possible, what can I understand about fabrication here, how can I extend and develop my ways of looking, what does clinging involve at different levels. And through that, understanding something about the fabricated nature of things, of all things, all phenomena, all experience, all appearance. This is a very deep, beautiful exploration and then at a certain point going even beyond the notion of fabrication when one sees that time is empty and fabrication is empty and that opens up a whole other level of the inquiry into emptiness. So very brief summary, I'll explain that before I'm not going to go into any more detail, but I want to kind of just pick up on a few of the possible ways it might be misunderstood or incompletely understood, or we could just fill out the understanding to hopefully make certain things a bit more clear if that's possible. Because sometimes it has happened quite a few times that someone has been quite excited about the whole ways of looking approach and exploring it and found it very valuable. But then they say something or write something that makes it clear that they haven't really understood the sort of radicality of it or the fundamentally of it or just how pervasive it is, how pervasively it applies as an idea. So what can be quite common is for someone to say, I play with my ways of looking, I practice that way, or even if they're a teacher I teach ways of looking, but then I tell people perhaps at the end of the class or the end of the course or whatever it is, now you can rest from ways of looking. Or I do that, but then I just like to, I do that in my practice, I play with different ways of looking, I explore it, it's exciting, it's wonderful, but then I like to just be, I just like to rest from any way of looking, etc. So if someone says something like that, it really means they haven't understood that it's impossible to have a moment of consciousness, a moment of perceiving anything, of experiencing anything, a moment of anything appearing without there being a way of looking. We cannot rest from a way of looking, actually not even the unfabricated, not even cessation of perception of feeling is really technically a rest from a way of looking. Anything we see, sense, anything we sense at all, anything experienced at all is always experienced through a way of looking. Now of course we may or may not realise that, we may or may not be conscious of what the way of looking is at any time, we may or may not be deliberately playing with the way of looking, but there is always a way of looking. So it's not possible to let go of way of looking. Now this isn't just a little, you know, pernickety sort of point, because if one doesn't understand that, one actually has undermined the whole structure of the ways of looking approach. It can no longer function in a profoundly and widely liberative, liberating way. If one has just converted the phrase ways of looking to ways of practising, and there's this kind of way of practising, or this practise and that practise, there's all these three ones just gathered practises which one might find all very powerful, very helpful, but then there's a time where I'm just resting from all that. And that time of resting from all that assumes, in this kind of not quite understanding of the approach, that time of not resting then assumes that there's a possibility of not having a way of looking at any moment. And that has great implications for our understanding of the nature of perception, of fabrication, of reality, of emptiness. It limits it hugely. So that's one thing that's very, very important. A second thing, minor thing, I actually mentioned it the other day in a talk, but I'll say it here as well. Although it's not possible to rest from a way of looking in any moment of consciousness, it is possible, however, to rest from deliberately practising a way of looking. So I might be practising a certain way of looking, I need a chair, a nata, fabricated, whatever it is, and then I might decide to rest from that. Or I might move from that way of looking, that deliberate way of looking, to practise another way of looking. The important thing is that I cannot rest completely from ways of looking, but also that it's actually important to move between ways of looking, and pay attention to what happens when I move between ways of looking. Whether I just rest from any deliberate way of looking, and then I just fall back into a kind of default mode of way of looking, or whether I switch from one deliberate way of looking to another way of looking, it's actually important to see the effects, the changes of the brought on perception by changing ways of looking, either to the default one or to another deliberate one. So through the contrast between what I perceive, what I experience, between this way of looking and the other way of looking. The point I was making the other day in the talk was, this way of practising insight notation, based on ways of looking, is not so dependent on keep the continuity going. At 18, maybe 20 hours a day of continuous mindfulness, and through that the mindfulness accumulates a kind of intensity and pervasiveness which allows it to see reality as it is, or pierce through the illusion to see reality. Here we actually need to rest from ways of looking at times, from deliberate ways of looking, excuse me, or change them in order to see the contrast, because it's the contrast, it's seeing the contrast, the differences, as I said, brought in perception by different ways of looking that bring me the insight. Or connected to there, or modification of there, sometimes you hear or read someone, maybe not using the language of ways of looking, maybe using the language of lenses and the lens of anatta, seeing things as not mean of mind or the lens of impermanence, and they're using that kind of flexibility of ways of looking with a slightly different language. But then they drop back into talking about being with what is, or the way things really are. And what they mean, and it's clear that what they mean by the way things really are, is not emptiness. They don't mean emptiness, the emptiness of any real way things are. They don't mean that the way things really are is they're not any real way. As if all these lenses of a couple or two or three lenses that they've sort of described and practiced with and put out there are kind of more superficial levels above a level where it's possible to be with what is supposedly, and the way things really are. As if there's another mode of being that is not a lens, or as if there's a particular lens that is the lens that reveals the way things really are. That's bare attention, or just pampercha free, sort of vividness of reality. Now there's a similar kind of misunderstanding, a similar kind of truncating of the whole possibility of deepening insight, a similar kind of road block in the road of deeper insight there. Because one is assumed as a what is. One is assumed an end of fabrication somewhere that's not the end of fabrication. It's assumed a lens that will show me how things really are. There's a privileged lens, if one is using that language, a privileged way of looking. Not understanding that one can possibly travel the road of emptiness, exploring emptiness beyond any notion of what is or the way things really are. There is no independent reality, independent of a way of looking of a lens. So we are just left with lenses, ways of looking. So this too betrays a kind of similarly limited understanding, or even a misunderstanding, kind of a limited use of this approach. But it was really significant, very, very significant. Or another version of this sort of thing, a sort of misunderstanding, very limited understanding, and a very problematic understanding. It happens when someone talks about ways of looking, emptiness, no real way things are, just ways of looking. And then says something like, all there really is, is a flux or a flow out of which the way of looking shapes this or that perception or appearance. But all there really is, is a flux or flow. I don't actually explain a flux or flow or what, but the problem really is in that all there really is, is a flow, a flux of something or other. And a flux, a flow is a process, something that happens in time. So again, there is something that's assumed to be a reality, independent of a way of looking, this basic flux or flow and time in which flux or flow must happen, this flux or flow must happen in time. And it's out of that basic reality, that the way of looking then shapes this or that more familiar objects of experience that we know. But again, it's limiting, it's truncating the process of, process of insight, truncating and limiting the possible depth of insight. Time is also empty, time arises through ways of looking. Take away the clinging enough, take away the avijja enough, time is not there. Time does not get fabricated. So there's a real danger there, again, that practicing ways of looking with such an understanding, harbouring in the background, this all there really is, is a flux or flow, whatever. The practicing ways of looking that way will not lead to an opening to the actual unfabricated, because it's staying entrenched in clinging to a notion of time as something basically existing, really existing. It may even be the amount of unfabricating that can happen with such a view in the background. Even if it's not in the foreground, even if it's not clearly articulated, maybe the practicing under the umbrella of such a view or having that view in the background actually brings pretty limited unfabricating through practice. So very significant, quite dangerous in a way, in terms of the way they will really confine our openings, our understandings, really our sense of what emptiness is, and of how practicing it, but really of what emptiness is, and thus of what reality is. So that's a couple of things that are really important. Second thing is a bit more subtle, but sometimes people, when they're talking about their insight practice or reporting their insight practice to me, and perhaps they've come from another tradition, they might use the language of drilling down through illusion or of seeing through self. For example, I see through self or I see through a certain manifestation of the meditator ego or something. And that language of seeing through is very different than the language implied by ways of looking approach, which is more seeing as. So for example, when I practice anatta, a way of looking, when I practice the anatta view, I'm seeing as this phenomenon, this experience, this thing is not me, not mine. I'm seeing it as not me, not mine, rather than as me or mine. I'm not seeing through it. And seeing through, the important thing here is seeing through has certain, the phrase seeing through, the idea to see through something to me has certain implications and assumptions wrapped up in it. As does the phrase drill down, certain implications and assumptions, including an implicit realism. I'm seeing through, I'm seeing through the illusion, seeing through this veil to something else, which is the reality that is veiled. And that's quite, it sounds again, it might sound panickity, but that's actually fundamentally different in terms of the presupposition of what we are doing and how we are approaching understanding emptiness. How we are approaching this inquiry and exploration into emptiness is fundamentally different than the language of seeing as. Seeing through as certain implications and certain, a certain kind of realism, a certain assumed reality implicit in it. As does the phrase drill down. Seeing as, to me, just implies that there are a range of ways of looking whose effects on perception interest me and whose effects on perception, particularly regarding fabrication, dependent arising and the implicit emptiness of all that, that interests me. I can see it as this, this pain, this physical thing, this phenomenon. I can see it as this, I can see it as that. I can look in this way, I can look in that way. And that's different than seeing through. Similarly, the language can be quite similar. And again, this is something I said the other day that it bears repeating, I think. That word fabrication wasn't so popular a number of years ago. I'm aware that some people have picked up that word now or re-picked up. Perhaps they used it ages ago. Because it's a Pali word and it's a good translation of the word Sankara or Sankata as fabricated. And so people thinking about Dhamma or teaching Dhamma or thinking about their own practice will very commonly agree it's an important concept. After all, the Buddha uses it. It's right there in the wheel of dependent arising. It's right there regularly in the Pali Canon. And they think of fabrication as this is an important concept. Fabrication is an important concept. And kind of, yes, seeing through the fabricated or whatever is important. And for instance, one very common idea would be what's fabricated is Papancia in the common sense. Proliferation, making a fuss, getting in a tizzy over something, catastrophizing, etc. blowing things up at all proportions. That's all fabrication. And when we let go of that, through mindfulness and bare attention and equanimity, we're actually not fabricating. We are in contact with the unfabricated. So mindfulness, bare attention, equanimity are ways of looking, modes of looking that reveal the unfabricated. Just things as they are. So then a person might at the same time be interested in the concept of fabrication, agree it's an important concept. And whether they use the word unfabricated or not, they might implicitly agree there is an unfabricated perception that we can be in contact with, it can be revealed to us. But they have no interest in the mystical depth of the unfabricated as I would understand it as something beyond any sense of subject, object, space, time, awareness, etc. Beyond all phenomena. And they have no interest in that kind of deep mystical unfabricated or it feels irrelevant to life as we know it or it's only for some people who are kind of into that. But this, holding all those views together would in a strange way be making a kind of arbitrary and artificial distinction between everyday life or life and what is mystical. Because this concept of fabrication and the or rather fabricating, the possibility of fabricating is actually one strand. There's one strand of fabricating in the ways of looking approach that I'd like to support and make clearer. We're not actually presupposing what the end of fabrication is. I'm not deciding in advance. Fabrication stops at a kind of bare, pristine reality of things appearing to me. Or it stops on the kind of view that most people would agree on when they're not in Papansha or not in a tizzy. Papansha is a Pali word that's actually used itself at a lot of different levels. It's come to be used really at a much more gross level. So that's just one end of the spectrum of fabricating. Papansha is very gross fabricating. If we follow this idea of clinging deeper and deeper and keep the idea, just withhold any presupposition or any quick deciding on where fabrication ends. So fabrication itself is an open concept. Let's find out through exploring ways of looking, through getting more skilled at letting go of subtler and subtler and deeper and more refined levels of clinging. Let's just see where this process of fabrication stops and where the unfabricated is. It's actually just one spectrum and to me it goes all the way from Papansha through everyday normal perception, through quieter, sort of more pristine awareness of that, and then through a whole series of fading. All this is one spectrum and that series of fading as it goes all the way down to the fading, the unfabricating of any sense of subject, any sense of object, any sense of space or time or consciousness or anything like that. So if it's one spectrum, one enquiry into fabrication and how we can let go of fabrication, why has a person drawn the line where they have? They need to somehow justify that. If you draw the line at just, it's what appears when we agree with most of the other people on the planet about what is real or it's what appears when things look really shiny and clear, as they will with a kind of bright mindfulness. It's just a point on that spectrum of non-fabricating. So where exactly do you draw the line and why exactly have you drawn the line there? Again, the principle of fabrication, clinging and fading here, it's one principle and it's the same principle that a person is drawing on when they say fabrication is an important concept and Pancha is what's fabrication and we want to unfabricate that, get rid of that so we can be with what's unfabricated. It's the same principle, but it's one spectrum continuing much, much deeper than that. It's only presuppositions, essentially unquestioned reality assumptions that one is dragging in to what's really, as I said, one spectrum and therefore coherent system, coherent principle, fabrication, clinging and fading. It's one system, coherent system and then one is dividing that spectrum either arbitrarily or just in line with my presuppositions, dividing what was coherent and undivided, a continuous spectrum and in some way by dividing it actually making it incoherent. Now one can do that, of course one can, but it's just what's the justification? It seems to me one would need a pretty strong philosophically worked out justification if you're going to do that. One makes something that was coherent and incoherent. Okay and similarly, well I mean sort of minor misunderstandings, a little bit related to something we said earlier today. Sometimes someone reports to me, you know, I'm trying to get rid of the usual relentless sense of self and that's actually how they're approaching their meditative practice and again they might have heard some teachings or picked up a book or something and have sort of twisted the intention or distorted the intention, very understandable, to trying to get rid even momentarily of the usual relentless sense of self. Sometimes, oh I'm trying to unfabricate something, I'm trying to get rid of something. That intention to try to get rid, even if it's just remote, have a moment taste of the free of the usual relentless sense of self. That may be either, again, from an idea that's being dragged in about the reality of no self. It's a very common understanding to understand what we're doing in emptiness explorations as we want to see that what's real is that there is no self and then one's taking that idea where one has heard it or read it or misunderstood it or whatever it is, one's taking that idea and bringing that in so then I'm trying to get rid of this usual sense of self. So maybe drag an idea in, a habitual idea, a common idea that the reality is that there is no self. That's the ontological truth of things is that the self has no reality or that what is real is no self. So one may be coming from an idea and or it may be coming from an aversion or even a neurosis, a sort of aversion to oneself and the sense of self or the kinds of ways that the self arises. So this is really not helpful. Aversion will certainly not help in the whole investigation. If aversion is there unconsciously, it won't help in the investigation of ways of looking at fabrication and emptiness. And if it's there driving things, it will tend to actually just fabricate more. But also it's not helpful because the understanding is wrong. One has dragged in another understanding, another assumption about reality and truth that is different than the assumptions that ground the ways of looking approach into emptiness. So some of this will be obvious for some of you and some will seem not obvious at all and like a bit like hair splitting actually really really important. And you will see it in the fruits because if these sort of basic grounding ideas are not correct or they're limited, they will be limiting. And what they deliver in terms of the way the whole meditation exploration opens up and what it delivers and the degree of unfabricating it delivers and the degree of understanding, emptiness that it delivers, that will all be limited because some kind of basic assumptions are getting in the way of distorting things or limiting things. So when we talk about ways of looking, what are we talking about? We're talking about the whole collection or weave as a set of what's involved in the relationship with anything that one's experiencing in any moment. So the tendency to grasp or hold on or push away to whatever degree clinging in that obvious sense, the appropriation of self, the assumptions about its reality, all kinds of other assumptions, the ideas, the conceptual frameworks, the belief in time, all that is woven into the way of looking. When we practice ways of looking, what we're really doing is taking certain elements of that whole collection of what's in a way of looking at any moment, just focusing on certain elements and changing them. So for example we used earlier was anatta, not me, not mine, the habitual way of looking without thinking about it, without it being a conscious action in the mind or something we can even often realize is going on, certainly without it being a verbal, is me, mine, me, mine, to this experience, that experience, this object, whatever. What we're doing when we practice the anatta way of looking is we're just changing that, changing that to not me, not mine. And this not me, not mine is something that's very, very lightly held in the way of looking or you could say inserted into the way of looking, actually we're removing the usual me, mine, and very, very lightly and delicately it's there in the way of looking. The way of looking itself is, well we'll come back to that, ways of looking as we practice them have subtexts so that when we say empty for example as a way of looking, we don't really say it, we might say it just as a whisper in the mind or we look at something and look at it as empty, that's practicing a way of looking. But what that means, we could write an essay on it or a book even, what does it mean? We're not going through all that every time but it has to be implicitly woven into the way of looking when we look at things as empty. So the subtext if you like, this is what sometimes joke called the small print of a way of looking is often very complex and it has to be held very, very lightly, it's implicit there in the way of looking. If we return to the anatta way of looking and actually just focus on something that was interesting, I was talking to someone the other day so this just serves as a good example and they were, they had moved on from practicing the anatta way of looking with for example body sensations and thoughts and mind states and things like that. They had actually moved on to what's usually more difficult, to a stage of anatta practice where one's regarding awareness itself, the consciousness itself as anatta does not mean of mind. And in the course of the conversation it became clear that the subtext here is a little more complex. So what's involved here, there's, this person was aware that it meant there's no doing of awareness. So for them what the anatta of awareness was, the only thing that was in their anatta way of looking when they turned it on awareness was that there's no doing of awareness, which actually means there's no agency. It means, so they needed to have that language I think just slightly altered. It's not that there's no doing, it's that there's no one doing it. It's not that there's no effort and no doing because later on one really begins to understand at a very deep level and perhaps at a deep level you see that any moment of experience, any moment of appearance and perception or any arising of any phenomenon at all involves doing on the part of the subject. It's not non-doing, it's not it's the fact that we could say there's no agent, there's no agency, it's not me doing. The effort and the doing that go with awareness are not me not mine. So that's one thing that he needed a little bit expanding because what he was finding was, unlike when he did anatta practice, anatta way of looking on other phenomenon, it worked quite well with the fading and the release of dukkha etc. Here with the, when he was trying to do the anatta awareness it seemed to be quite limited so we were finding out why. It's because there wasn't enough in his way of looking when he looked at awareness and said anatta or and looked at it with the view anatta rather. So it's not that there's no doing of awareness, there's no agency, that was one thing but he was also missing two other factors. One is that there's no possession of awareness, it's not mine. So there's no entity of self that owns this awareness of which the awareness makes up a part of this self, this entity. And there's no, also thirdly, there's no identification with awareness, the awareness, the consciousness is not me. So we have no possession, no identification and no agency for example. So if you want a little acronym, if this is helpful, you can think there's no PIA, there's no PIER. That understanding is tacitly wrapped up in and it's present in the subtext of just attending to the sense of awareness and looking at it as anatta. So like I said, even there, even before we get onto like it's empty in itself or empty empty, even there with the anatta of awareness, what's involved in the subject is actually fairly complex and it needs to be woven in and understood as part of the way of, in the way of looking. The way of looking needs to have that understanding in it. So this is, this is not just the details there, but the general principle is very important. And so this business with ways of looking is really, you know, we're not talking about something abstract, we're talking about practice and it's really an art and in some cases very subtle and delicate art and skill that we need to develop. It's not just going to happen like that and it's certainly not abstract. So, you know, do you know for yourself firsthand the effect of sensing something through the lens of a way of looking where you're regarding it as empty compared to what happens when you're sensing something and through a way of looking that just automatically as a default just regards it as real, as inherently existing. These two have massively different effects on perception and you're really regarding something through a lens that really understands its emptiness. It's a profound fading that happens. Of course we know we move in the world and only very little fading happens when we're essentially practicing unconsciously and automatically and by habit the view that comes out of what the Buddha would call avija, ignorance, delusion, which assumes the reality, the inherent existence of phenomena. So we're not talking about something abstract here when we talk about ontology and ways of looking and all that business and emptiness. We're really talking about practices which are real arts to develop. So if one just tries it, it's unlikely that we'll have any effect to just regard things as empty or not real. Unless it really means something, I'm very clear what it means and I have ground or reason. So if I just regard something as empty while I'm paying attention to it, unless that word empty really means something, unless I have and unless I have real really good grounds or reasons to believe that it's empty based on my experience, based on something an understanding, an insight I've really consolidated through practice, it won't do anything. It's just a word and I might as well say octopus or something. So these ways of looking need to be understood by us. What does it mean? What's involved? What's the subtext in that way of looking? And we need to have confidence in that subtext, in what it means. I have confidence that there's a real grounding in my being, there's a real reason why I can sense something, pay attention to something, at the same time as I'm paying attention to it, regard it as empty. That has to be based on my clear understanding and a solid, consolidated foundation of understanding through experience. I know it's empty. I know why it's empty. I know why I think it's empty. Why I know it's empty. And secondly, and related to what I said earlier, we're not talking about big chunky gross sort of philosophical ramblings sort of rumbling through the mind. We're not talking about thinking about things. We're talking about a way of looking. These understandings, these convictions, these clarities are very, very kind of subtly woven in to the way of looking. So the way of looking itself is very, very delicate, very, very agile. And actually sensing things that way, we're not like busy thinking about some philosophy. And that ability to convert clear, essentially clear philosophical understanding based on experience into a very delicate and agile and kind of subtle way of looking, way of sensing something, any of the six senses, that takes practice to develop, usually, almost always. But I would say, you know, I wonder if there's anything in life, anything in existence, anything that we could spend our time developing between the intervals of birth and death, the interval between birth and death. There's anything more worth it than developing ways of looking. If I want the fullest, deepest, widest liberation, I think that comes through liberating ways of looking, the liberation of ways of looking, the development of ways of looking of a range of ways of looking, because that will open up this whole territory of emptiness, etc. We could say in the end, what liberation is, as well as the liberation of suffering, it's the liberation of ways of looking. In other words, ways of looking become available to us. We're not imprisoned. We're not constrained. There's the liberation from the prison of only certain fixed ways of looking at things, only certain fixed relationships with the world and perceptions of self, other world, time, etc. So full liberation is a liberation of ways of looking, liberation into accessibility of ways of looking. And of course, that enables more liberation from suffering. But even more, if I want the fullest, deepest, widest love, not just liberation, if I want the fullest, deepest, widest love, then if I follow that love, if I follow the Eros, if I follow the Meta, and I pay attention to the ways of looking, it naturally opens. And then I practice those ways of looking. What that does is it increases the Meta, increases the Eros. And because of that, the Eros-Psikilogos dynamic, the soul-making dynamic is ignited further, galvanized further, opens further. There's more Eros, but more psychilogos, and translate that as image, is more sense of things. The sense of things opens up. They show us more aspects. We can see sense levels of them, other perceptions of them, psyche and logos, the whole idea, the whole conception of things, the perception, the conception, psyche and logos, the perception, conception of things, opens up. And in that opening up of psyche and logos of perception and conception, the idea of things, then that can stimulate the Eros even more. There's more ways of looking opened up, etc. The whole thing opens up, through following the ways of looking that we find out are there, when there is Eros, when there is Meta or Karuna, etc. And then developing those ways, looking it opens up further, further, further, further. So, I've explained that many times, once in the Ecology of Love series of talks, how the whole Eros-Psikilogos dynamics works. The soul-making dynamic works in the opening up of love, basically, to whole other levels, whole other domains, whole other spread range. So, if we want the fullest, deepest, widest liberation, ways of looking. If we want the fullest, deepest, widest love, ways of looking. If we want also the fullest, deepest, widest meaningfulness and beauty in our existence, in our life, the sense of meaningfulness and beauty. If we want that to be the fullest, the richest, the deepest, the widest. Again, trusting that perception of meaningfulness and beauty enough to discern what are the ways of looking that are there, when those senses are around of meaningfulness and beauty. And there will be many. And then practicing them, and what that does, again, it will open up further, the sense of soul-making, meaningfulness and beauty are integral to soul-making. And that will open up further, the sense of beauty, etc., and suggest, open up more ways of looking. This is all just part, again, of how the soul-making dynamic works. It's a general principle here. If we want to, if we want something, whether it's to understand emptiness, whether it's liberation, whether it's love, whether it's soul-making, we need to practice ways of looking that lead to that, practice ways of looking in ways that lead to that, to understanding emptiness, to a sense of liberation, to love, or to a sense of soul-making. And then, what those ways of looking deliver, understanding emptiness, and liberation, love, or soul-making, those deliverances will also open us to more ways of looking, or deliver to us also a greater range of ways of looking. And we practice ways of looking as powerful ways to open to what it is that we want, whatever that is, what we want deeply, emptiness, understanding, liberation, love, soul-making, dynamic, soul-making, general. And then we let that opening, that the ways of looking, have delivered. We let that, or it will, open up more ways of looking. That's how the soul-making dynamic works. It's how liberation works, it's how an understanding of emptiness works. Practice ways of looking to get x, and then let x deliver to us, suggest to us, open for us, even more ways of looking. So, sometimes I think there's nothing more worthwhile in life than developing the whole notion and idea of ways of looking. Okay, so if we, as I said, just revisit this point, it's quite easy to hear about the ways of looking approach, and hear about emptiness, and how they relate, and jump to certain conclusions before we've practiced it, or even start, get off on the wrong foot in our understanding. So a few things here, and particularly with regard to ethics. So, someone might hear the teachings about emptiness, and start, so to speak, at the end, as if they're being asked to believe something, which is that everything, all things are empty, and they might hear that, or read it, all things are absolutely empty. And then they've forgotten about the whole ways of looking thing, and they just interpret as if they're being asked to believe something, that all things are empty, whereas that's a conclusion. So in practice, we don't start by believing anything like that. We don't start with the conclusion, because someone who would start in such a way would understandably have the concern, but then I wouldn't care, or nothing would matter, and what about ethics, and that sort of thing, if everything's empty. And they're trying to understand it from their sort of usual conventional point of view, without really understanding it, which can only really come about through practice. Rather, we start with these two notions I mentioned before, start with the possibility that there are, there is the possibility of a range of ways of looking. That's part of what it is, to have a human mind and heart, human chitta. And secondly, that there's, we explore the fabrication of suffering, of self, and other, etc., through different ways of looking. And that exploration, as I said, is an open-ended experiential and experimental inquiry, without pre-deciding the limit of fabrication, or, and I was like, without pre-deciding that fabrication just ends here, thank you very much, and it doesn't go down to all that deep-fading business and that mystical stuff, without pre-deciding that, or, or nor, without pre-deciding that everything is empty and everything is an illusion. Even though we might be told that may be the conclusion, we don't know what that means yet, and it would be silly to start with a conclusion that we don't really understand. Let's keep it open and find out. Just take those two ideas, the possibility, flexibility of ways of looking, and the extension of that range, and this idea of fabrication of suffering, self, and other, and then open-ended, experimental, experiential inquiry, without pre-deciding either way. So that should allay, to a certain extent, someone's fears around, well, you're asking me to believe this and that everything is empty, and that to me implies that I'm not going to care, or nothing matters, or ethics won't matter, etc. But a few more things that's important to say here. Emptiness ways of looking, in other words, ways of looking that see something, or see experience, phenomena, objects, to some level or other as empty, any, any emptiness ways of looking is just a way of looking which we can pick up and put down. In other words, it's not an ultimate truth, it's not somewhere to park your way of looking as if we could forever and stay in a certain way of looking. The whole thing is flexible, and it needs to keep a range and flexibility. We pick up and put down emptiness ways of looking, so that sometimes we want to put down emptiness ways of looking and pick up a rarefied view of self, of upper, of suffering, of this or that, of some ethical situation, even of something like responsibility, in an ethical misdemeanor. So how do we decide whether we pick up, what we pick up and put down in terms of a way of looking? Well, we're responsive to what's needed, and in Buddha Dharma we base our choice of way of looking in any moment on what reduces suffering. In soul making Dharma our choice is based on what opens up the soul making. Suffering, if we're basing it on the reduction of suffering, is of self, of other and world. But emptiness ways of looking are things we pick up and put down. They're not, now I'm gonna all the time be in this emptiness ways of looking, or this, this, this view of emptiness of all things, and I'm sort of stuck there, and how will the ethics come in, and things like that. So that's the second point, very important. A third point, again, relates to the fact that understanding emptiness or exploring emptiness through the ways of looking approach is probably more unusual, and what's more common, perhaps, is that emptiness is equated, not with the kind of understanding that comes out of the whole journey through the ways of looking approach, but rather emptiness is equated with either sort of a big empty space in which appear just insubstantial objects without, and there's not much self or personality it seems, or much doing. And that's often someone's understanding of emptiness. Or a second understanding can be emptiness kind of refers to just a sort of machine-like process of the aggregates, the five aggregates of being, body, they do not perception, mental formations and consciousness. And what's really empty is the self. Here emptiness means impermanence, impermanent, because there is just the impermanent moment to moment arising and passing of that process of aggregates in time, bit like a machine. And that's what emptiness means to some people, or that's a common view. So either it's a big empty space of insubstantiality, not much self, not much doing it seems, or it's this kind of emptiness of the self which actually reduces kind of impermanent nature of the aggregates as a process in time. But neither of those two understandings or views of emptiness has any obvious connection with dependent arising, nor does it easily bring out the connection with dependent arising and also with karma, which are two sides of the same thing, dependent arising and karma. So those two views of emptiness, the connection is not obvious. However, one of the reasons one might want to explore emptiness through ways of looking and fabrication paradigm is that if we start with those notions, ways of looking and fabrication, then dependent arising is woven in always, right from the beginning. That's totally what we're exploring, what we're paying attention to. Dependent on this way of looking, dependent on this mind-state attitude relationship, such as that's all woven into the way of looking, dependent on this way of looking, then suffering and self and other and world arise and appear a lot, a little, or like this, or like that, dependent on the way of looking. Dependent arising is woven into it. So even something like generosity becomes a way of looking. When I'm generous, the self, other, world, arise a certain way. I feel myself as if I really practice generosity, if I really am very generous and open-hearted, then I'll notice something about how self, other, world appear. I'll really take it on as an inquiry and also that suffering gets reduced through generosity. In the now, in the giving, of course you can have some suffering because you've given so much that I'm afraid, etc. But generally speaking, one really explores it over time with wisdom. One sees that basically generosity becomes, we could call it a way of looking, you see how expansive that term is. But when there's generosity, I sense things, I sense self, other, world a certain way, and suffering is reduced. When there's the opposite, the absence of generosity, then when there's let's say stinginess, then self, other, world get fabricated very differently, more separate, more contracted, more hard, more solid, and suffering increases. So that in this way of working with emptiness, the ways of looking approach and fabrication approach to emptiness, then ethics is integrated into emptiness right from the beginning. It's unavoidable. The approach integrates karma into our understanding of emptiness, unavoidably. We see it, we know it, we feel it firsthand. And as we go deeper, we see the world is different, dependent on the way of looking. The other, those other two understandings of emptiness that I mentioned briefly, the sort of big space in substantiality and the sort of moment to moment arising, passing and aggregates. It's possible, or it's more possible that they can lead to a kind of moral nihilism. One might assume, well, there's no self there, therefore there'll be no selfishness. There's no self in that machine-like process of the aggregates in time, momentary arising and passing, nor is there much self in that big, big empty space. Then with less self, there's less selfishness. So one might think, oh, they should help with morality. Maybe they will, but neither actually is there much of a world there. And the effects of ways of looking and of actions kind of get dissolved and not noticed in that big space or in the kind of microscopic, myopic attention to the momentary arising and passing. And then it might well be that ethics needs supplementation by separate teaching, separate teaching about seelah, because it's not quite clear what these understanding of emptiness have to do with ethics. There's also the case in a lot in the Tibetan tradition, how they emphasize repeatedly the importance of ethics almost as a separate domain than the understanding of emptiness. It's like it gets re-emphasized as if the, don't forget about karma. Karma is more important than shunyata, the Dalai Lama would say. So sometimes, because either their approach to emptiness is not coming through ways of looking, fabrication, dependent arising paradigm, it's coming through an analytical approach where one just analyzes logically to see that things can have no inherent existence. Or it's coming through a sort of some level of a big space approach to emptiness. And then those two approaches too will need this kind of supplementary teachings on ethics, because it's not at all obvious what the connection is, and there's a danger of nihilism. It's not wrapped up the way appearances arise dependently and arise as this or that, as well as suffering. Nor the fact of arising that it arises dependently on the way of looking. No clinging, no arising. No avijja, no arising. But in the ways of looking fabrication approach, the ways of looking approach to emptiness, there may be no need for extra ethical teaching in terms of basic ethics, because experience through the practice teaches ethics and karma, again through inquiry into ways of looking, fabrication, dependent arising, it's right there. I remember interviews really quite some years ago, and someone came in for the interview and as part of it, he said, well, this view you have about the non-reality of things and emptiness, that really needs challenging. And he was a bit concerned about it, but he couldn't quite make the challenge himself. But he said, it's just not right, it's not right. Now, I know that he was very concerned about things like climate change. So I can't remember how the conversation panned out because he had never practiced ways of looking, etc. So I don't remember actually what it said, but it would have been worth his while to actually look among, for example, among Dharma teachers, who are the ones who seem like they're not really engaged very much in social justice issues or environmental issues. So this is what he cared about. If you have that notion of the emptiness of things, it's dangerous to any kind of care for climate, etc. Now, he knew that I was very concerned with climate and I was very active, etc. So he should have rather, I think, asked the question, how is it that you can believe that about the emptiness of things and still be so dedicated to climate issues and environmental issues and working on that and trying to raise consciousness about that? That would have been probably a more appropriate question. If one looks, who is it who thinks, practices, teachers, talks in terms of the kind of the deepest and most comprehensive emptiness? And are they people with deeply engaged practices? In other words, their conception and practice of the Dharma extends to engagement with social justice and ecological issues, etc. And the ones who don't, who have a most realist view, contrary to the sort of easy assumption that this person was making, if we don't have a realist view, it will be a problem. Actually, look at the practitioners, etc., writers, teachers, who seem to espouse a very realist view and see what's happening in their engagement. Even if someone doesn't totally first hand get the whole deep and comprehensive emptiness thing, it will still, if they're drawn to it, it will still guide their philosophy and what they aspire to and realize in practice. So you can compare that way. In other words, to put the whole thing better, the fact of this coexisting of the deep thorough emptiness view, the coexisting of that with a radical and long-term commitment to engagement, should have led to a questioning of his fears and assumptions that emptiness would give rise to moral nihilism, I would say. Also, we might just reflect in terms of, I'm going to talk more about ethics in the future, but I might reflect a little bit, be wise to reflect that it's not so much non-reification or seeing the emptiness of things that leads to a lack of care of ethics. I might assume that again as this person did, but really it's a reification that leads to crime, a reification of self as a center of gravity of acquisition and of other, I want that object, that thing, a real thing that's going to give me something. That's what leads to crime and unethical behavior. It's a reification of self and what I want, the objects I want. With non-reification of self and other, the impulses to criminally acquire or unethically acquire things decreases. That would be another reflection. I will come back to talk more about ethics later on. So it's very easy to misunderstand or only partially understand, as I said, or to drag other assumptions into this whole understanding of emptiness and this whole approach to emptiness and ways of looking approach. Bertrand Russell, I read this the other day, I'm not sure what the context is, whether he was meant this deliberately about someone that had written something about what he'd written or something sounds a little ticked off and it sounds quite judgmental, but he said, a stupid man's report of what a clever man says can never be accurate because he unconsciously translates what he hears into something he can understand. Stupid man's report of what a clever man says can never be accurate because he unconsciously translates what he hears into something he can understand. So yeah, don't know the context, it does sound a bit judgmental etc. But I think that the more general point is well taken, that it's easy as human beings for us to read or hear something that's subtle and sophisticated and actually just squeeze it into a box of what we can already understand or what we already know. So we chop bits off, we shave bits off, we turn things around, squeeze them, change their relationship so that it can fit into the box of what we already what we can understand and what we can already know. This business of emptiness is deep and subtle business and there's been in the history of Buddhism a lot of care around emptiness teachings and also we should say with tantric and Vajrayana teachings, a lot of care about who they're given to and how we need to set them up etc. The tantric teachings have parallels with similarities at least with soul making dharma teachings, similar. Do we really need to take care that both the emptiness and the soul making in this case is not misunderstood, distorted, twisted, only partially understood, only understood at a very superficial level, that we've not got sloppy with all that? I do think so and through the history of the Buddha dharma through millennia there's been until very recently a lot of care around how teachings are how and when they are given and disseminated. I think I've said this before but it's possible for us to be sloppy in our understanding of emptiness. So it's subtle and it's sophisticated and it runs very very deep. So for example I think I've said this before you know you say what does emptiness mean? It means that there is no real way anything is but that fact of emptiness, that meaning of emptiness, that there is no real way anything is, it does not entail that a thing can be anything. There's no real way anything is but it doesn't mean that a thing can be anything or if we put it in slightly different ways the fact that there is no way a thing really is does not imply that there is no way it really isn't. So there's you know it's not just saying oh things are empty therefore anything can be anything. Nothing can be anything subtle and sophisticated. I really think it's important not to be sloppy with all this business about emptiness. We're talking about a very refined understanding in that middle way of emptiness is really a razor's edge it's really a very fine line between nihilism and realism. You need to take care not to be sloppy. Some people say again this is not so much sloppiness but just a little more precision as needed so I've heard several times someone say some people say we need to understand emptiness before we practice soul making dharma because otherwise we're going to reify we're going to reify the images. A couple of things first of all not necessarily and I don't think James Hillman was reifying his images. Very much the sense I get from reading him was that he was really interested with in that territory of as if kind of what we would call neither real nor not real the imaginal middle way and I don't think he had any training in emptiness or Buddhist philosophy or anything like that. It's more a almost an aesthetic disposition or an intuitive understanding of what the imaginal involves. But secondly and more importantly it's the non-reification of images is more it's or understanding not reifying images involves more than just seeing that they're empty. It involves the recognition of their different ontological status than the ontological status of conventionally agreed upon objects or material things or emotions. So emptiness is something that applies to all objects. Yes it applies to like we said at the beginning applies to this solid desk is empty of inherent existence but also is the dream your daughter had of a monster chasing her that came out from under her bed as as it applies to an imaginal image in meditation. Emptiness applies to all objects. It's not enough of an ontological assessment here. What we need to do is understand that an image an imaginal image has a different ontological status. It's not that just that it's empty. It has a different ontological status and it's then conventionally agreed upon for example material objects so that if that lion in the image wants to rip me apart and eat me and devour me I understand in the meditation that there is a different ontological status than where a real lion there. But they're both empty so there's something we need to understand a bit more precisely. It's not just the fact of emptiness. That allows us to navigate an imaginal practice. Different ontological status of images and conventional objects but both empty. When it comes to emptiness practice and something I've said I think recently and I want to highlight it again is I think I think Eros is really needed. We really need to be erotically curious about emptiness and the practice. We need to be passionately interested and excited even. You know the necessity of Eros for practice is actually the necessity of Eros and the necessity of Eros in life and in helping with all kinds of things. Something we should emphasize. So think of someone I know she's probably 85 and she has never trained her mind in meditation not interested in any of all that. She's 85 and she has some physical dukkha but a fair amount of mental dukkha in relationship to her physical dukkha and other things but she has never trained her mind. So her reactivity is going to be more than someone who has trained their mind through mindfulness and meditation and she's got lots of habits of the chitta, habits of the way she relates to things etc that are not going to really help that will actually increase her dukkha. So you'd think okay mindfulness will help her training in mindfulness will help her and undoubtedly it will but I have a question is it mindfulness that would help her the most because this person is also I would say not actually deeply interested in anything and I've known her for quite some years and I would say that she's never really been deeply interested in anything so she's been happy enough in her life etc periods of less happy and all that now she's getting old she is old does more mental dukkha but is it the mindfulness that would actually help her most because she's not also deeply interested in anything there's very little in other words eros in her life eros too this deep interest in something that would give her life soulfulness, meaningfulness, beauty, vitality and in that would there be an increasing well-being and happiness so which is which is the more important ingredient the mindfulness or the emptiness oh the eros sorry the mindfulness of the eros the eros is really really important in life in relationship to suffering yes it cuts but without it a life without eros will inevitably be have some form of depression in it to get back to what I was saying before I think emptiness practices need to be fueled by eros by a kind of you know what do we call it erotic curiosity and excitement or there will be much more profoundly and widely helpful and liberating if one is really interested in emptiness excited and passionate about it loves it loves exploring it instead of emptiness and emptiness practices just being a set of techniques to reduce suffering which which they can be regarded at yeah look at this this way practice this way of looking and there will be much less suffering but if they're just related to as a set of techniques to reduce suffering and decrease unhelpful cognitive patterns I don't think we're going to get all the wide deep liberating juice out of it actually we could say that with any practice mindfulness meta generosity compassion we need eros with our practice in the Mahayana suttas I'm pretty sure it's from the different personal parameters but maybe other places as well they say things like you should only teach a body satva only teaches emptiness to those whose hair stands on end when they hear about it they're so excited or they they you know shed tears of joy or being moved even if they don't understand it it's only to those people ie emptiness the teachings of emptiness and the practice of emptiness are not being set or received in fertile ground if it if it's coming with it oh I should practice emptiness my dharma friends are into it or they say it's the it's the best thing emptiness is the best or emptiness is necessary you can't be a proper practitioner if you don't practice or it's advanced so I you know my ego gets a certain boost or gratification in practicing that level of teachings or whatever all that will will be a dry soil an unfertile soil practice of emptiness practices of emptiness inquiring into emptiness exploration it needs eros absolutely I think to be really fertile it's that it's the juice it's the it's the moisture the water in the soil that allows it to be fertile and it's that eros that also will prevent us being sloppy with it we're not satisfied the eros wants to go more a more refined understanding more subtle understanding more careful and precise understanding of emptiness so again care with the sloppiness care as well as I said before um in regard to the ethics question cannot cannot to start with a conclusion about emptiness so someone uh had a question from someone a while ago that ended up on my desk and um and they were asking about trauma and they were saying well in in your book seeing that free basically or the book seeing that freeze is basically saying that trauma is empty whereas there was another book they were reading and it was basically saying that trauma is real and it's uh neurologically wired and it's a it's a real physical factor and then the phrase they use was the body keeps the score or something the body keeps score so you get these two views either it's empty which was you know attributed to that's what seeing that freeze that's what rob is saying it's just empty or this other view it's a real thing it's an absolutely real thing and it's real because it's neurologically wide you can't get away from the physical reality of that so why not why not why not just bring a bit more care and openness and subtlety to the investigation this is a really really important investigation why not acknowledge some dependence that it must be at least some dependence of the experience of trauma on factors in the present okay so here's this traumatic event or series of events maybe even series over a long time and just acknowledge that how that how that arises for me its effect in the presence in the present how it comes up in the present depends on factors in the present depends whether it's met by love met by warmth met by spaciousness or met whether it's met by harshness and judgmentalism and contraction and all kinds of other assumptions and all kinds of things there's some some dependence just start that we must know everyone must agree on that the experience of trauma how i actually experience it in this moment depends to some extent on factors in the present and maybe just start with that without assuming either of those other extreme views rob says trauma is empty or the extreme view of it's a real thing the body keeps the score is an absolutely hard-wired real real thing that's not what i'm saying by the way that one extreme view it's not what seeing the freeze says or the way it approaches it anyway but why not just start with some acknowledge there's some dependency of the actual experience of trauma on factors in the present the experience of trauma depends to some degree on factors in the present and then just start with that and then keep exploring exploring with practice and with ways of looking without presupposing either extreme view or again presupposing how much aware is the limit of the effect of conditions in the present on on trauma same principle keep it open keep an investigation don't jump to either a real either a realist or a nihilist view extreme what the buddhist called extreme views the middle way is the middle between extreme views what else is trauma after all but but an experience and we don't talk about trauma if it has if it's gone completely and there's no experience it has no effects whatsoever in the present trauma is its effects in the present so that's what we're talking about this is really really important just you're just starting with the idea a very gentle open idea i don't know there must be somewhat dependent on present factors this experience of trauma must be somewhat dependent on factors in the present let's find out how much that would be a ways of looking empty empty ways of looking approach and the way i would teach him to find out find out just keep going if you come to an absolutely that's it okay but find out because it also might be the case um just pursuing this this particular theme of trauma that um other other other factors are at play here so again rather than agree or rather than argue between absolute and abstract views you know rather rather than argue between two views that are kind of absolute it's like this it's like that um and that may be actually quite abstract again they're abstract by that i mean they're taken as positions by belief rather than an experiential inquiry so rather than argue between two views that are kind of extreme absolute or abstract with regard to trauma either than it's an inherently existent unbudgetable reality of the body and nervous system on the one hand or that it's empty on the other hand it would be much more helpful to start with what should be quite obvious that trauma will be experiences that very differently and have very different effects dependent on the attitudes habit patterns and habit patterns of mind heart will soul and relationality that accompany it and those habit patterns might have been already established as habits before the occurrence of the traumatic incidence this person might already have had before this traumatic series of incidents might already have had a quite strong tendency to aversion might already having entrenched unfortunately a habit towards what we might call laziness a habit towards easily collapsing as well psychically in terms of herself in terms of her strength and power and uprightness might also unfortunately have a lack of wisdom and a habitual uh what became habitual might be an avoidance of challenge and avoidance of the unpleasant might have been inculcated as a habit into the life into the mind and and the being might have developed um in many areas a weak will and yet in other areas a kind of stubborn will all these all these kind of pre uh pre-constituted habits and factors may be part of determining more than the actual traumatic incidence itself may be part of determining how the trauma and its effects play out in in in her life over decades it's not so much the trauma it's the fact that those traumatic incidents landed in a soil that was already teeming with not so helpful ingredients and they were habitual ingredients and so when the trauma comes up again so to speak which again is already a presupposing notion when it comes up again it meets those same unhelpful habits and it plays out um in in the soil of that of those unhelpful habits and they uh create uh a really much more difficult soup so which bits the trauma which bits the pre-existing habit that was developed so there's a lot to inquire into and sometimes we're too quick too sloppy and saying either our trauma is just empty don't look at the past or just giving it some kind of an inherent reality without looking carefully enough at at conditions and it's exactly looking at conditions and how what we can do with conditions in the present including insight ways of looking including bringing other factors in it's exactly that that's going to help so how can i help in the present is ends up being the same inquiry as what's uh what's inherently existent here they go together because of the whole ways of looking approach because in the ways of looking approach we're interested in what gives rise to more suffering here what locks suffering into place right now in this moment and what decreases suffering so the whole um the whole inquiry into ontology and into reality is totally connected with the inquiry into what's helpful with regard to my suffering sometimes people um again have the idea of emptiness as being something very abstract or not really relevant to their life or but it's really not another thing people sometimes or it's tempting very un again very understandably tempting to do is to uh equate the understandings of emptiness with the understandings of the quantum physics uh so the understanding of the emptiest ways of looking uh paradigm with the understanding of quantum physics and so again this is very tempting there's certainly some really really interesting parallels i think and fruitful parallels but i think we have to be a little careful here um partly because physics as a discipline can change and uh trends or or in in physics can change at any time what um thomas kuhn calls paradigms in physics can change at any time and then change back or etc so we have to be a little careful that uh with uh with equating the two and then using quantum physics as a sort of um now understanding of emptiness depends on quantum physics or our belief in emptiness depends on quantum physics i know i've talked about in parts i think it's really interesting but it's more wanting to use those understandings to really shake up and shake loose and challenge um the kind of usual assumptions and beliefs about reality which often boil down to about material reality and the way it must exist independent of the observer i mean a kind of uh Descartes in Newtonian way and really wanting to um expose and shake up those uh those assumptions and beliefs in response to what can often be and even in the in the history of the buddhist dharma there's a there's a sense of the outrage um at hearing um emptiness teachings the conclusions that an practical expression of emptiness yields so einstein um as many of you might know was very very opposed to the whole uh the implications of quantum physics this idea that um you know the moon doesn't really exist or the moon isn't really there until you look at it it's not there when we aren't looking so that's absurd that's kind that seems to be what quantum mechanics quantum physics is implying and in various ways over many years he tried to expose the flaws in quantum physics but every time he failed and at one point he teamed up with two other guys padolsky and rosen and they came up with a kind of thought experiment that seemed to that seemed to really undermine the framework of quantum physics and this idea that things might not exist independently of our way of looking of our observation and then after he died yes must be after after he died a physicist called david bell came up with um a way that one might actually decide whether einstein was right or einstein padolsky rosen were right or where the quantum physics was right and then i think after david bell died a guy a french physicist called alan aspect um devised an experiment was actually able to test it and what it found was two it found two results that are kind of not really arguable with one is that um in some instances non-locality is a fact of nature like two particles uh are somehow woven together um they can affect each other or it seems they can affect each other across massive distances of space instantaneously faster than the speed of light in other words that space isn't quite what it seems to be but the second one for our purposes uh interestingly that first one is the second one for our purposes is that um quantum particles do only become real become only this or that when we observe them so this was a result um of this experiment by alan aspect quantum particles are actually only real when we observe them and einstein was really clinging to his preferred beliefs regarding reality regarding nature regarding cosmos again this is like how passionate am i about um wanting to go deep with these questions and also the importance of recognizing what is it that i want to be true which i've talked about a lot before well so in that this probably the the shroding a wave equation is a complex mathematical equation in abstract mathematical multi-dimensional space and in a way it describes the uh what could we say the the way it describes what we will see or the probability of what we will see when we look in certain ways at at uh at subatomic particles when we look we see something and dependent on how we look we see this or that wave or a particle etc but the shroding equation is kind of depicts if you like what exists when we're not looking when we're not observing but it's a it's a it's not really something we could call real in the sense that it doesn't depict a thing that exists in time i said it's a abstract mathematical equation in multi-dimensional space this is as if there's a kind of indefiniteness of matter and indeterminacy of matter before observation so again there are parallels here because it's not saying um they're parallel to the ways of looking and emptiness understanding that i would like to offer it's not saying there is the complete non-existence of matter matter is a complete illusion it's just a mental projection some spiritual teachings say that there is no matter matter is just purely mind what the ways of looking and this emptiness approach and other approaches to emptiness stress much more is not that there's nothing there at all there is no matter but that it's dependent on the way of looking that it forms to be anything and what it forms and where it is and all that so there's again a parallel between this ways of looking understanding emptiness and some quantum physics understandings for example the schrodinger equation in matter is again it's not that anything can arise because there's no way something is because the schrodinger equation is essentially indeterminate it just gives probability probabilities it doesn't then mean that anything can arise and it was an electron in one moment and then when i looked in the next moment it was the hollywood set of mary poppins or a boris johnson speech or the 1917 bolshevik revolution in russia or whatever it's not the case that anything can come from something but matter is indeterminate indefinite before observation an object of phenomena in experiences indeterminate indefinite it's the observation it's the looking it's the relating to that makes it something independent on how the what is the way of looking in that moment is what we what we experience so there's parallels there with quantum physics so i said i think in one of those dama seminars recently maybe it was a lot of ontology i can't remember but um that ontology is basic and unavoidable in life again we're not talking when we talk about ontology and emptiness we're not talking about abstract philosophies we're not talking about something that only is really relevant in microscopic super advanced physics or whatever um ontology views and beliefs about reality are basic and completely unavoidable in life so said you would have a very different response a different kind of concern if your daughter reported um when she came down for breakfast in the morning that there was a monster in her bed under her bed in the night and was chasing her you would have a very different concern uh if you just thought that's a dream maybe you would be maybe some of you would be concerned what it meant about her unconscious and whatever psychological problems she had but it would be very different from the concern than if you actually thought there was a some kind of monster there or a bear or a tiger or snake or something so ontology is just part of our life in every moment we're making decisions about what's real what's not it's woven into our perception of everything that's why i said before if you really practice and know how to practice ways of looking and get to the point where you can engage a way of looking that that uh hold something in attention and regards it as empty and see what a vast radical difference that makes to the experience of that thing compared to just the normal way of looking where there is the assumption of the reality of that thing and that assumption of reality is just normally woven in to our experience there's always an ontology an ontological conception this is part of a larger point about there always being conception there's always an ontology and an ontological conception woven into the perception of anything but unless one has experienced holding in one's way of looking a different ontological conception and practicing that practicing with the agility of that and seeing what it does one probably doesn't even realize that one thinks it's some one doesn't realize that ontology is woven into perception but it's inevitable and it brings with it of course a hierarchy of value judgments as i mentioned this the other day in the talker guy house again relating to your daughter reporting the monster under her bed our ontological assessment brings in a certain value judgments what do i need to do etc but in practice the hierarchy of value judgments that goes with ontology is is actually constitutive and active in and as practice so for example um in mindfulness practice there's the idea communicated the teaching communicated that papa and story and self are somehow not real they're fabrications they're less real than what we might encounter through as bare sensation or what is revealed with bare attention with mindfulness or equanimity etc whereas zogchen and mahamudra teachings um the nature of mind which can be interpreted in all kinds of different ways at different levels is real whereas this or that other thing is is not real or less real or in zen teaching some zen teachings often what's um what we know through thinking and concepts is not real so these value judgments ontological judgments are wrapped up with value judgments and they constitute and are active in and as practiced as practice they get reinforced and by the teachings and sort of indirectly by a kind of even non-verbal rhetoric if we could even use such a phrase without much philosophical or psychological unpacking explaining questioning probing but it's there so that of course um in um let's say mindfulness teachings um the relationship with image imagination the possible imagine will be well that's that's um that's not what's there and bear attention and mindfulness it has a much lesser status it's a much lower place in the hierarchy of things occasionally it might be helpful if a person gets stuck or or it might be helpful in for the arising of faith you know imagine the buddha or imagine this or that or um if you just can't do it without mindfulness alone is if mindfulness alone that's that's the you know the real practice real practitioners don't need the second best uh use of the imagination this unreal thing that's kind of for weaklings or people when you hit a hard spot you just need a little extra help little so all these kind of um ontology is inevitable it brings with it value judgments not not just reality judgments and what ontology means those reality judgments involve or imply value judgments and all that's wrapped in wrapped into practice often in ways that as I said are communicated very very strongly and repeatedly through different uh streams of dharma and different styles of teaching but not with a lot of um real unpacking philosophically or psychologically so we need to we need to be aware of that I think the importance of ontology the importance of asking into all this will you know how we approach these questions and these explorations and inquiries into ontology will determine so much of what our practice is and what our practice delivers what is legitimate and what opens for us so for the buddha um I would say he was very concerned with this again it's maybe popular these days say he wasn't interested in that at all he wasn't a philosopher um but I would say he was very concerned um there is of course his you know some people say there's only two suttas in the pali canon which address emptiness and they've got emptiness in this title so the greater and shorter discourses on emptiness or something like that one of which isn't really about emptiness in any sense at all it's a strange strangely given title and as any of this reading back of a kind of mahayana version of mahayana versions of emptiness is is not what the buddha originally taught but that's just that's just again a little sloppy little lazy so there's so many incidents one could point to in the pali canon a lot of them are seeing the freeze but there's many many you know when the buddha kachayana asked the buddha what is right view and he says um what do you teach about right view and the buddha says I teach the middle way the middle way between is and is not that's the middle view most people assume is exit it exists it is or it it does not exist it it is not for any any phenomena but I the buddha teach the middle way neither is nor is not what does it mean well it means the whole emptiness thing and it takes a lot to unpack what he means by that neither real nor not real neither is not is not takes a lot but it's right there and in the many many explorations of dependent arising and dependent ceasing and dependent originations a whole many explanations it's right there there's a case where sari puta is talking to us think a monk called mahakotita and he tries to explain uh dependent rising and he tries to explain how consciousness depends on nama rupa nama rupa means um not just body but the perception of forms and the perception perception itself and attention and contact and vedana and intention and sara puta explains that depends on consciousness perception vedana depend on consciousness and consciousness sara puta goes on to explain depends on intention perception attention meaning so perception depends on consciousness consciousness depends on perception vedana depends on consciousness consciousness depends on vedana and mahakotita goes excuse me what of course it's baffling but he's pointed this mutual dependency is exactly what um what we mean by emptiness these two things let's say consciousness and perception they're not two but neither are they one they're neither one nor two they're empty they're mutually empty they're mutually dependent so it's there all the way lots of places in the pli canon and it's of course tied to the buddha was concerned with that and it's very an understanding of ontology was very much tied to what he meant by liberation it's there right his definition of right view one of the definitions of right view it's there completely in in what he pointed to as the most central insight on his night of awakening this dependent arising and particularly the mutual dependent arising of nama rupa and consciousness of perception vedana etc and consciousness and mutual interpenetration mutual inseparability mutual dependence this causes that but that causes this at the same time and dependent arising is the thing to understand the thing that a liberated arahant understands has penetrated and similarly the buddha didn't just talk about the anatta of phenomena that they not me not mine he also uses the word sunya their void means something different their void in themselves they're empty in themselves and he gives different analogies in terms of the aggregates and how they're empty of substance empty of inherent existence so it's totally different than it's totally there in the pali canon if one looks for it knows what to look for but with regard to awakening and emptiness i think we need to make it another point which i've alluded to several times recently but i think i'd like to draw it out a bit more more someone was asking whether they just need to understand emptiness to be liberated or whether there's a certain amount of psychological work that they need to do as well do i need to to you know resolve and understand my psychological stuff what's interesting is we never seem to hear anything like that in the pali canon about people's self-judgment or their inner critic or their incapacity to sustain intimate romantic relationships or their inability to commit or their their frustration at their own lack of self-expression or inauthenticity or anything like that it seems there's no report of that kind of dukkha in the pali canon it's also interestingly absent in for example the teachings of ramana maharishi or nisagarata maharaj you just hear these teachings about emptiness or the nature of awareness or that kind of thing so why the absence is it that in the time of of the buddha in india they just had better parenting is that is that what so people didn't have psychological issues or is it that that the sense of self and the expectations of self and of relationship are very different now than they were in the time of the buddha's india and in terms of awakening and the self-view and penetrating the self-view in the first fetter of stream entry we nowadays need and want and expect practices and realizations to address and to decrease or even eradicate that kind of suffering the suffering around self that comes from a certain set of expectations and a certain self sense and a certain expectations of self and of relationship we expect need want practice and realization to address all that so i have a question did practices and realizations need to be different now or is it enough that we can just just work with the emptiness yes for example with nisargadatta and ramana and those people they had very different socially constructed senses of self that they had to deal with then we do very different socially constructed senses so they had to deal with in themselves and also in the issues brought to them by seekers and students and on top of that their role and status as kind of constructed by indian spiritual customs with respect to the guru there's a whole kind of way you are a way you hang out with a way you talk to the guru there's a whole kind of relational paradigm there and they have this certain role of status and it's determined within a certain range how you hang out with them what you do what you ask them for what you expect from them what the social situation allows and what their role and status determines so that meant that they also didn't have to deal with or even encounter a lot of the self-burdens and self-expectations and shapes and relational dynamics and relational expectations that most of us do and we're expecting this one thing this insight into the world thing this insight into emptiness even if it's the emptiness of everything to address what may be very different selves a different self-sense different socially constructed self that we have nowadays in the west and different sufferings different challenges to address you know i can think of and i'm probably many of you can think of someone people who seem to have had tremendous depth of practice in the past whether it's jhanic samadhi and emptiness understanding but they don't seem to have much capacity or skill with let's say personal intimacy and personal connection maybe our notion of awakening needs to involve more than just insight more than just insight into emptiness maybe awakening also or enlightenment or liberation also implies certain skills with respect to the kinds of challenges that we have to address because of the society we live in and because of the way the self is constructed differently in our society so yes emptiness yes it's empty but i still have to have a certain set of skills i have to be able you know if i realize that everything is empty but i'm really insensitive in relationship my capacity for intimacy i just don't seem to be able to meet people and navigate that territory in terms of deep connection with people is that awakened am i satisfied with that so it might be i do need to work on some of my psychological stuff if we use that term broadly and those kinds of skills as well as the emptiness understanding and skill and understanding and skill and emptiness practice become a part of what aspects of a much larger thing called awakening but the emptiness piece delivers a lot you know it really delivers a lot and it really opens up a lot even if it's not in itself a single the single thing that we can rely on and hope that everything in our life gets taken care of but it does open a lot of doors the deeper we go into it so if we take it very deeply in practice that the middle way of emptiness can for example open up the conceptual legitimacy and practice possibilities of flexible ways of looking at perceptions for example of particular divinities not just universal sense of divinity and sacredness of universal emptiness but of particular divinities and particular sacrednesses that we go into with the soul making practices if i go deep enough in emptiness practice it opens up the conceptual legitimacy for those and it opens up the practice possibilities as well for the flexibility of ways of looking of perception that perceive a particular divinity and not just universal divinity particular sacrednesses and not just universal ones and actually more broadly we could say that the realization of deep and comprehensive emptiness really go deep we've realized there is no ultimately true conceptual framework regarding conventional reality there's no ultimately true way that we can explain the workings of conventional reality again that doesn't equate to saying all conceptual frameworks are equally true or valid but there is no ultimately true conceptual framework regarding conventional reality and that understanding comes out of emptiness going very very deep and very wide that then legitimizes and opens up the possibility of a range and a flexibility of conceptual frameworks and ways of looking within conceptual frameworks it's not just ways of looking but whole ideas or systems of thought we can also move between them with the same ease and flexibility and agility and lightness of touch lightness of holding as we move between ways of looking this comes out deep practice of emptiness and of course that too is very relevant to soul making dharma soul making practice it's one of the things we emphasize quite a lot please consider supporting dharma seed with a year-end gift your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all visit dharma seed.org donate to learn more and thanks

 Hi everyone, I am recording this from home. I got home and realised there were a few questions that I hadn't had time to respond to that I think would be helpful for people at later points in their practice. There were a few other technical instructions that also I think would be helpful for most people at some point or other as they go forward with jhana practice. And a couple of general things. Most of what I want to go into kind of falls into the category, not all of it, but most of it kind of falls into the category of working in sort of grey areas, jhanaic grey areas. So as I mentioned, sometimes when jhana opens for the first few experiences, very intense, very clear, seemingly effortless, one's very much in the jhana and might feel like there's nothing to do, nothing to improve on even. And as one gains more experience in and out of that jhana and gets more familiar with that particular jhanaic territory, whichever it is, whatever jhana we're talking about, then there do appear times or it becomes apparent in one's practice that sometimes it's very clear, very pure, if you like, a pure jhanaic experience. Other times we're sort of in the jhanaic territory but not quite sort of parajhanaic territory or kind of half in, half out or on the edge, or as I mentioned there's mostly in but some very subtle hindrances are kind of yapping quietly at the borders of consciousness or there's an area of the body that won't clear up or these kinds of things. Or, well there's many things, but it falls into that kind of territory, the grey area, working in the grey areas or transitional states, not everything but a lot of things. Before that though there's a couple of general things and then something about soul-making in jhana. So let's see how we do. So first general thing is again to make clear that I would say it's more optimal for the way we're practicing jhanas to not fall into a sort of strict unbroken rhythm of formal practice. Sit walk, sit walk, sit walk, 45 minutes, 45 minutes, one hour, one hour, whatever, however it's divided up. Of course sometimes that will feel like it's the most helpful rhythm at that time but the key thing here is does it feel like it is? Again, am I listening? Am I being responsive? Am I being attentive? Am I tuning my practice rhythm at the moment right now, not for this retreat but right now for this morning or whatever it is or this afternoon or this evening? Am I tuning it to what feels best, what feels like it's actually most fertile? So you know sometimes if you sit and the jhana's coming and it all feels really good you can go way beyond one hour, way, way, way beyond. Just sit in an unlimited way. You run out of batteries, try again, try to get the jhana again without getting up maybe two or three times. Sit as long as you can, not with any forcing but just sit as long as it works, as long as it feels good and the same with walking practice and the same with standing practice. Unless for some reason you only have 20 minutes or 40 minutes or whatever it is. I know I'll just go 40 minutes to walk now or whatever and that's all fine but basically there needs to be this responsive attunement of the rhythms of our practice and we're really finding out, feeling into, getting a sense for and finding out what's the most helpful right now. I'm breaking out of a kind of rigid, tight, predefined, preset mold of a rhythm for practice for different postures. This is also part as I mentioned you know because the day needs to breathe and there needs to be space for appreciation and beauty and a bit of exercise and open heartedness and all that. So I'm reiterating that but I also want to say that when some of you will start exploring insight ways of looking as a huge stream of investigation in your practice and when that opens up I would say the same principle applies there. You can have times where it's sit-walk, sit-walk, very rigid and predefined. That's absolutely fine but you also really want times where it's this more fluid, attentive, open scheduling that's much more responsive because again there in the way that I would or the way I most commonly teach insight practice which is through different insight ways of looking, learning them, employing them, seeing what happens with them. Again we still want that, we still want the day to breathe, we still want space in the heart and the soul for appreciation and beauty and to be touched and the open heartedness. We also need space to notice the after effects on perception so whether we're doing jhanic practice as it goes deeper and they become more common and we know to look for them and look out for them very gently without pressure but also insight ways of looking practice. Again very potentially very powerful very noticeable after effects on perception there as well. But there's another reason when we come to insight ways of looking or practicing insight ways of looking is that partly the way that process works in this way of teaching insight meditation is is not it's not through the continuity through the accumulation of a sort of power of mindfulness through just being completely continuous with the mindfulness so sit walk, sit walk, unbroken, go to lunch, continue the mindfulness, great way of practice and a certain intensity and this continuity of mindfulness will be developed hopefully that way and through that continuity of mindfulness it can illuminate certain things and so that's great but an alternative way of going about things is when we practice and actually deliberately practicing different insight ways of looking then I actually need the comparison so I need to practice this insight way of looking and then actually in a way let it go and compare the difference in perception when I let it go. Now I'm just back to a normal consciousness I'm not particularly trying to of course there's a way of looking because there's always a way of looking but not particularly trying this or that way of looking and it's through the comparison that I learn about the dependent arising yes I'm not trying to accumulate so much mindfulness that I then perceive the truth because there isn't one truth. I'm practicing a way of looking and then I let go of practicing that way of looking because when I because then when I practice the way of looking I notice what it does to perception I notice the sense of things when I stop practicing I notice a different sense of things so in a way we actually need a looser or rather less continuous schedule of practice or intention of practice. Again it can be continuous for a long period absolutely fine but it does need some some kind of coming out of the insight way of looking and maybe just going into a more normal consciousness without a deliberate intention so that we can see through comparison the effect of the insight way of looking. So it's not that it always has to be like that but sometimes that's part of it too there's less less of this emphasis on continuity. I see when I practice this insight way of looking I should see in 10 minutes and 20 minutes in an hour whatever it is it should be obvious what's happening there. Obvious its effects on perception. Okay so that's one general thing. A second general thing is about posture and I mentioned on the retreat you know eventually you can kind of access jhana and stay in a jhana in almost any posture. Posture becomes very very not important but before that time before the practice is really ripened to that stage posture is actually very important particularly at the beginning and I was encouraging in the early some of the early guided meditations etc really to sense in to the poise and the balance in the posture and and see if you can get a feel for a sense for the beauty in the posture the beauty the dignity the nobility that is reflected in in the balance between the chitta qualities that the posture manifest expresses reflects between openness relaxation softness and between brightness alertness uh poison intention on the other hand um but also just the sense of actual balance in the posture and the actual way that the mind when it encompasses the whole body in and includes the whole body space in a very alert open receptive um sensitive way that the body the posture is actually very very subtly affected and subtle changes in the posture can affect our ability to have that kind of pervasive energy body awareness. So this is really really important if you're not familiar with this it's really to say at the beginning of the retreat it's really really worth taking a little time to play with. I remember actually Kirsten showing me a picture of her very young nieces which has three or four nieces currently meditating or sort of trying to make them they're very very young you know and um between I think 10 and two and ten or something at ages but one of them it was very interesting it was quite a young one you could tell from the photograph that her awareness was spread throughout her body they were all sitting cross-legged sort of copying Kirsten and cutting with their eyes shut but the awareness was spread through the whole body and you could feel from the photograph the the the poise um in the posture but also in the attention in the awareness and you could feel the quality of the attention and then it pervaded her whole body and it was very um alive and right there it's quite interesting posture and chitta quality go very much together at first and it's really worth playing with that if you're not familiar with it. I remember one of my first teachers in an interview it was many many years ago and I got called in for an interview I think it was one of the first people they would call you in for interviews on these retreats and I was one of the first people to get called in I thought oh why am I first and he said you he said I was a teenager and he said you're very out of contact with the earth or something like that very out of contact with the ground I had no idea what he was talking about but it struck me as being you know really a problem um it sounded like a very serious ailment um and so he played he got got me to sit and played with my posture a little bit and and at a certain point uh he just there there and I was not really in contact with my body at all back then I had no training in that I was probably pretty disconnected as probably most teenagers in that in that generation were disconnected from my body but he just said there so he was just gently moving my shoulders and my toes and then he said there and really wasn't so much a visible kind of yoga yoga looking posture that he was responding to he was responding to he was feeling the way my posture helped my mind uh kind of inhabit um the whole body the whole body space in a in a in a very natural and open and upright and alert way and I think that's what he was picking up on of course to me it just seemed like some kind of supernatural powers at the time now I'm much more used to all this and teaching and energy body is very much what I emphasize I can easily understand how it's possible to have that kind of awareness with another person of another person how their mind and body are right now and how their energy body awareness is and how how the posture is perhaps allowing supporting or limiting certain possibilities psychically certain possibilities for the citta or certain possibilities in relationship I remember working with someone in an interview and they were in a very difficult space in their heart and mind and soul and and was asking them to come come into presence to be in relationship with me with the open heart and the sort of holding there but I could tell that uh and I'm encouraging them to open and open to their body experience as well but I could tell that there was just something very very subtle in how they were sitting holding their posture so it didn't look like certainly nothing like being hunched over or contracted or some kind of obviously defensive posture was extremely subtle extremely subtle but that was enough to prevent her from uh coming into a different relationship with herself but also coming into a different relationship with me and we played with that just a little bit and it allowed the relational space both with herself and with myself to open up to possibilities that were just not available two minutes beforehand five minutes beforehand she had no idea no idea so the mind the citta affects the the body and the posture and the posture affects the citta and this goes very very subtle and deep until it begins to be the you know states of openness and states of jhana states of samadhi and all that and become much more familiar and they're less dependent on the posture being like this or like that to enable them but maybe for quite a while for some people it is quite posture dependent so it's really worth taking the time to to play with posture even in kind of almost what might seem like microscopically subtle ways that was part of what I was trying to encourage at the beginning of the retreat okay so let's run through a few more specific technical things and as I said this is most of these are relative to things kind of going well but hitting some hitting some tricky spots where it's just not quite coalescing or coming together so we spoke about you know sometimes there can be pain obviously or discomfort in the body or a sense of contraction or holding or tightness somewhere in the energy body the physical body and we spoke about the possibility of actually taking that difficult spot and for example if you're doing metapractic as your base practice actually imagining the center of the matter there the matter is radiating from that very difficulty or imagining the breath coming in and out there or the energy that being the center of the energy body in the center of the breath energy if you like or the center of the light the white luminosity or golden white luminosity that might pervade the energy body and just almost exactly where you'd least expect it imagining imagining that to be the center of of what you're trying to encourage and sometimes it can turn out just as we least expect counterintuitive to be the loveliest place but what I want to have now is similarly that if the mind is fuzzy or foggy or woolly the mind the head and if you're tired a similar thing can work imagine light there in the head the head feels dull or there's that kind of tiredness behind the eyes or just the kind of woolliness there imagine the light centered there if you're working with light as part of the energy body awareness imagine the breath energy coming in and out there or coming in or out through the top of the head through there the sides the front the back whatever it is or radiating expanding out from that very woolliness so just the same principle but applied to qualities of the citta same principle as we we suggested with regard to bodily discomforts or blocks we can apply to discomforts or blocks in the citta and often they do feel in the head so we just imagine them in the head so one of some of these are quite basic some will apply to to working in the territory of any some apply to later jhanas and i'll go into that you know a specific jhana some of them apply to working outside of a jhana before you know even in jhanic territory or as i said they might the jhana is kind of going okay but there's a little bit that's not kind of brought into the into the fold of the jhana hasn't spread there so some of these things will apply at any level um and we just mentioned pain so again we mentioned on the retreat there might be again it could be any jhana say second or first or whatever the jhana ignitant is there i'm in the territory of the jhana but it's not quite suffusing the whole body and indeed there's some place in the body where there's pain or discomfort so it's in in the jhana territory the nimitta has arisen but it's not i'm not fully uh suffused it's not it's not fully suffused and it's not fully i'm not fully absorbed well we don't always it's not always best to hurry to spread or suffuse the nimitta that may be exactly the right thing but sometimes just pause a little bit because we've got a few options sometimes it may be yeah just go ahead try and spread it in the ways that we listed in the possible methods of spreading the nimitta through the bodily space to pervade and permeate as the buddhist says suffuse and saturate the whole body spread sometimes space that sometimes that's the best thing to do and just go ahead and do that sometimes though don't rush to do that stay enjoying where it's okay first find those okay places where there is pete where there is the sense of happiness if you're working the second jhana and stay there enjoy that more first before you think about spreading sometimes just in the staying and enjoying it will spread as we sit on the retreat and then there are other options too we talked about playing with perception many of you had a lot of success with that there's pain there's discomfort can i actually just imagine it begin to see it play with the perception the malleability of the chitta of the perception of the way of looking and see this pain see this discomfort as pete or as sukkar or as stillness or whatever the jhana nimitta is that's possible to to have there when we change the perception but basically there's different options we don't always need to rush to try and suffuse as the first option but they're all good sometimes we might be know something specific to the second jhana we might be working in the second jhana and we've known like very effusive happiness and intense happiness and really uh you know grinning for hours on end almost so that the face hurts afterwards and other times um uh experiences with the jhana less intense happiness or or something else so for instance one might be in the second jhana but it's not quite stabilized something about it feels a bit flimsy well it may need a bit more body in it a bit more uh put body in inverted commas a bit more pete may need a bit more of that kind of body energy body awareness so what you can do you're you're working in the second jhana but it's a it's a bit flimsy it's a bit weak somehow it's not quite uh stabilized perhaps there could be any of those issues and then you can just dip back to the first jhana what you're effectively doing is mixing more pete and more body pleasure in and just dip back it could be for a few moments it could could be for a few minutes sometimes you sing work just for a few minutes just dip back get more body in the experience more pete and then come back and see how the second jhana goes so this is actually we can broaden this and actually extend it to make a more general principle so again we're talking about when there has been lots of really clear deep pure experiences of a certain jhana and as as you're working more trying to marinate and develop mastery with that jhana you're in and out in and out getting very familiar and sometimes it doesn't go so well it doesn't stabilize or it's hard to enter it fully on certain occasions so if that's the case with a certain jhana whichever genre it is you can in order to stabilize it or to enter more fully sometimes apart from just working in all the ways we've talked about with sassy and all that sometimes it can help to go back as we just discussed from the second jhana to the first but it could be this could be fourth to the third or whichever jhana just go back one step or if you already know the jhana ahead if you've already got familiar with the genre heads to say today i'm i let's say i know four genres but right now i'm working on the third jhana well i can and it's not quite stabilizing i can't quite enter it fully i could just dip back to the second jhana it might be for really a few moments or or longer or i could go to the fourth genre if i already know i skip i skip forward it's the opposite of what i assume i say it's not going well i'd better go to a simpler level sometimes i go i go further to the fourth jhana again it might just be for a few moments literally dipping the chitta and the body in for a few moments and then coming out or it could be longer a few minutes even um or you know if you're trying to stabilize and deepen the fourth and it's not going so well but you're familiar with it could go back to the third or or to one of the formless rounds and then back to the fourth okay so this is a general principle here um skillful working when things feel like they're not going so well on those occasions they're still going well but they're not kind of they could be better um i mentioned so here's one thing particular to the third genre i mentioned and sometimes what happens at this level is that the breath becomes kind of in the stillness that emerges at the third genre it's like it allows the breath to perhaps become sensible again in all the piti and the sukkar it might be that we haven't noticed the breath we've let the breath go the piti and sukkar have become the primary nematas now which is a completely fine way of working as we've emphasized and but sometimes not only does the breath organically naturally become more sensible because there's more calmness sometimes as well it may actually help and the third genre to bring back uh an attention to the breath and at this point the breath should be very very subtle very very delicate and like we said it's the very movement of the breath breath is peacefulness very movement of the breath there subtle delicate gentle breath is peacefulness like those uh strands of seaweed in the lagoon just gently kind of so subtle they're swaying peacefully there's movement movement of the breath but the very movement is peacefulness and so sometimes deliberately coming back to find the breath again it may emerge as I said just organically we begin to notice it and include it or sometimes that can help deepen and consolidate the third genre if you feel that you need it um again and this is more general point um particularly as we go into the deeper genres and we have a sense of secondary nematas uh which we've talked about so for instance the secondary nematas just of release and relief um these are I think important ingredients of the jhanic mix and any experience jhana metta will notice these things and should notice these things and so they're not primary nematas but sometimes noticing them so again I'm working in a genre it's not quite coming together it's definitely I'm definitely in the territory but it's just not quite coalescing um not quite fully getting into it as much as I know is possible so sometimes actually then beginning just just very gently very delicate any pressure just looking for the the secondary nematas say of relief and release and noticing them and just for a little bit focusing on them and enjoying them even just for a few moments that can allow the whole jhana to deepen or consolidate uh like that so that's also very skillful sort of subtle movement of the attention and we're working what will help here it's almost like we're taking that relief and release or whatever the secondary nematas and kind of using it as part of the glue part of the stitching to help cohere the the jhana experience at that at that point so we know something particular to the fourth jhana we talked about uh oftentimes there is a a brightness there white golden light and that's quite central the stillness is the light the light is the stillness sometimes that can feel like a kind of vertical column of bright stillness through the center of the body space sometimes you can feel all around you sometimes it can be this it's not quite all round you yet and it's just um or one can imagine this vertical column of bright white light that is the stillness the stillness is the light the light is the stillness and it's right up through the center of the energy body space and one can begin to allow that or even encourage that light to melt outwards melt outwards from that central vertical column and in doing so it kind of dissolves the body into it it dissolves the body with it so that can be really really helpful at times other times um with different jhanas but this may this may be useful with the fourth jhana particularly again when that kind of leaning forward or if that leaning forward occurs in the fourth jhana with the sort of for whatever reasons we discussed a few possibilities there about the intensity of the focus and conceiving of the stillness and the nimitta uh in front of us sometimes it's really helpful to feel that you or the body of energy body is kind of falling backwards into a jhana ground and you conceive it backwards but in addition to just conceiving it behind you you know actually also fall back into it in a way again you're working differently with the attention it's a different mode of attention to be probing forwards or trying to enter penetrate in front something in front of me the valley is to fall backwards and that's different from something with within me this vertical column i'm expanding outwards um so there's different we talked about different modes of attention different conceptions of kind of uh the directionality of the attention the same thing with the jhana in relation to the nimitta and the whole body in relation to the jhana nimitta okay so um one other thing about the fourth jhana we mentioned when we talked about the buddha's description what's left is nothing but this pure bright awareness wrapped in this cloth of pure bright awareness was his description of the fourth jhana and then we talked at other times about kind of the idea of mixing cooking ingredients to move between jhanas so uh i kind of mentioned this it's just an extension of point i've already made on on the retreat if i uh i can turn up the sense of presence in the in the fourth jhana um and that will take me because presence is consciousness consciousness is present so to speak turning up that sense of presence so rather than stillness i said a different perspective on the fourth jhana is to notice the sense of presence and that will take me to the to the sixth jhana the infinite consciousness will begin to open that up it's already there the fourth jhana is already pregnant with it it's already implicit in the fourth jhana but another way you can think of this is kind of like with those cooking ingredients i mix mix a bit of this add a bit of more of this ingredient to this jhana and it will take me to another jhana so really if you say we're adding more presence to the fourth jhana adding even more about how are we adding it by tuning to what's already there so here it's different than cooking the tuning to the sense of presence again when i notice it when i tune to it it amplifies it so effectively i'm adding more of that particular ingredient into my cooking pot and the fourth jhana uh will will then change into the sixth jhana i've turned up the sense of presence just by tuning to it and amplifying it the tuning to it does amplify it and it turns up and it goes to the sixth jhana anyway of course there is a very there should be as i mentioned a very strong sense of presence in the in the in the fourth jhana um almost spellbound the mind is spellbound but still we can increase things and by tuning to them increase certain factors within the jhana and then that can sometimes just help that jhana consolidate i said often a kind of it's very common for fourth jhana to with a lot of experience to get just a little bit dull so just turn up that sense of presence but if i really then tune into the sense of presence and hone in on that i'm amplifying it and that can take me to the sixth jhana um one thing if i mentioned that the buddha says technically the breath stops in the fourth jhana whatever we think about the so-called biological reality of that that will be the meditator's experience it's hard to locate a sense of breath in the fourth jhana feels as if the body has stopped breathing but be careful don't try to assess is this the fourth jhana by keeping by keeping on checking whether your breath has stopped that's not the right way of it's not going to be helpful um just as checking where the thought has stopped i said um that's not going to be a helpful way of checking whether you're in the second jhana doing that kind of thing checking my breath as it stopped now hasn't stopped yet um that's this you know in a way it's kind of reinforcing that pattern that i talked about this micro pattern in our psychology micro pattern in the chitta the sakaras of the mind and to just give attention to the negative to look for what's not quite right what's not quite measuring up rather just get into the stillness and the stillness is there am i in the fourth jhana yet just get into the stillness really enjoy it really be with it with a very alive attention really see if you can penetrate into that stillness see if you can dissolve into that stillness if that stillness can dissolve into you the mind the body dissolving into the stillness the stillness um dissolving into and dissolving the mind and body and that's what we need to do and it will mature into the fourth jhana if if there's that alive attention and that kind of right right attention with it rather just keep checking whether the breath has stopped someone wrote me a note actually i mentioned about about breath so this person was obviously working around the territory of the second jhana i'm guessing from the note seems very clear um the quick and possibly silly question does it matter if the breathing is through the nose or the mouth the combination of a cold plus an enormous grin indicates probably the second jhana and opened mouth open mouthed means i sometimes breathe through the mouth so she had a cold and there was this enormous grin and so she finds herself breathing through the mouth but then she says and sometimes it feels like it dissipates the strength of pete or sukkha breathing through the mouth actually dissipated the pete or the sukkha so um i would say um if it's from the grin you don't have to stop your grin the grinning is good and fine um but probably it's the case that you can just very minutely almost move the position of your tongue against your teeth and that will somehow allow you to keep grinning um without the mouth actually being open and then you can breathe through your nose so that we can have a full grin and for a hink pretty sure if the tongue try it if the tongue is in a certain position we should be able to breathe through the nose because it may well be that when we breathe through the mouth in fact it often is when we breathe through the mouth the breath isn't allowed to become more subtle so uh what the buddha calls the bodily formations the breath are not allowed to become more subtle and with that the citta is is kind of um it's harder for the citta to become more subtle if we're trying to be in jhana so it's characterized by refinement of body energy awareness and and body energy vibration and the refinement subtlety of the citta you have to be that for jhana so if we're getting in the way by breathing through the mouth by keeping that keeps the breath unsubtle then it can be a problem so if it's possible if if it's not because of the cold if it's just because of the grin there's probably um things one can do with the tongue to start with it allows breathing through the nose and then maybe if one is ready anyway it goes beyond the second jhana continue with the nose breath and the whole thing gets more subtle if it's a cold and a bad cold well you'll probably just have to breathe through the mouth and put up with it for a while however uh as the citta gets more subtle um if it if it can and it's still you know it's not completely prevented by by breathing through the mouth at all it's not complete that won't completely block things you should find as the citta gets more subtle the breath will get more subtle and then even with a heavy cold um so this might even take uh you know going avoiding the breath at first going via what you remember of the energy body vibrations of different states of different jhani states or just remembering a jhana but if you get in in the territory where the citta is subtle then the breath will become subtle okay body affects mind breath affects mind mind affects body and breath um so if the citta can be can be kind of just help to become more subtle even if we have a bad cold when breathing through the mouth the breath will become more subtle and because the breath is more subtle actually less air is being moved and less air being moved you might find actually that even with a relatively blocked nose a quiet blocked nose can actually still breathe breathe through the nose because we're not actually breathing we're actually moving that much air and the little amount of air can find its way through that through the blocked nose but it's not that we're trying to make that happen it's just that we're helping the citta to become or allowing the citta to become more subtle naturally that allows the breath to become more subtle and effortlessly we will probably find where breathing through the nose and nose breathing is happening without us kind of you know trying to manipulate that physically um okay couple of things um just to finish two more things one is um so we talked on the last night about insight ways of looking that unfabricate and that potentially move through the jhanic stages in their process of unfabricating however i don't think in that practice the primary point or the primary aim is to necessarily learn a degree of skill that controls an insight way of looking to the degree that i can kind of stop the elevator exactly where i want to an exact jhana um that's a you know that's a good skill um but it's not the most important thing now what's much more important it's just important to understand what's much more important is that in that process of playing with insight ways of looking we understand the principle of lessening fabrication we understand the principle unfabricating to whatever degree through this insight way of looking um there's less clinging and because there's less clinging there's more letting go which is just saying the same thing and because of that because of dependent rising there's less fabrication and so the experience opens up refines out in these different ways so understanding that principle of lessening fabrication through insight ways of looking is really very important understanding how to fabricate less and thirdly understanding what exactly is involved in that subtle clinging so use this word clinging i said in a very stretchy way it means all the way from the most gross to the most subtle aspects of the relationship of the citta with phenomenal experience that we wouldn't usually think of as clinging i'm really really subtle so that in the end even avijja in the mayana even avijja even ignorance is a kind of clinging even believing looking at something and the unconscious belief that inherently exists which is what most human beings do most of the time most of their lives most of with most of phenomenal experience just that unconscious and unnoticed very common belief and assumption in the inherent existence of whatever is in in uh perception consciousness at any time we could call that avijja but you know in the mayana they also call it clinging it's a very subtle level of clinging and i use clinging in that sense too so understanding the principle of of lessening fabrication through insight ways of looking secondly how do i fabricate less how actually using these insight ways of looking and getting familiar with them and getting developing the art and skill of them and thirdly what exactly is going on here what exactly is involved in subtle clinging what subtle clinging is being let go of here and what avijja is is being let go of here so avijja is also has a whole range of aspects but also levels to it from very very gross of course complete deluded thinking etc to very very subtle and clinging as well so what exactly is involved in subtle clinging subtle avijja if that's what we're talking about and lastly fourth thing to understand the implications of all that the implications of the way less clinging less avijja fabricates results in less fabrication right then in the moment in the moment of looking in the moment of relating a way of looking in other words understanding dependent arising and emptiness as we as we touched on to some extent in the retreat so all those all that those understandings those four understandings are much more the point than being able to control and kind of to say i'll be able to exactly go to this genre and not overstep it to the next genre or whatever when i i'm fabricate through a certain insight way of looking so as always the insight is more important than the somatic experience okay last thing i want to read to you a fairly long note from someone on and this is quite important and for those of you that are familiar with soul making it's very important for those of you who are not yet familiar with soul making dharma but who may be one day familiar with soul making dharma drama yeah dharma it may well be very important so it's a little bit involved and it's a slightly long note but i feel it's really really crucial and it also expands our sense of how we might go about jhana practice especially when we have some soul making background soul making dharma and soul making practice background so this person wrote this has been a dukkha full retreat for me lots of dukkha so much pain and struggle around desire and sustaining intention and effort as always i asked i asked for permission to share this note as always and that was fine with her so for me so much pain and struggle around desire and sustaining intention and effort the kind of things we were addressing and talking about and trying to open up and inquire into it several times on the retreat so she continues your teaching on desire and soul making the last few nights finally prompted me to try to go into the dukkha last night to hold and sense it with soul and to see what images of the path and self and the self on it images of the path and images of the self on the path might arise there were several beautiful and meaningful images that came from sensing the dukkha like this and it felt like they began to clarify what i want from practice and to give non-pathologizing place to some long-standing and painful patterns in my life i won't go into this now what i want to say is that later on last night there was a lot of frustration around and i felt some confidence from the above mentioned experience about going in through the dukkha so skillfully as possible i let the frustration rip naming all the smallnesses and solidities in myself that i'm utterly sick of tuning to the power rather than the poison of this emotion or energy we talked about that as well in retreat at some point i didn't sense self-judgment in it just clarity and fire really really important this out of this a sense of space opened and in that space as i was breathing i became aware of a very subtle sense of the energy body breathing with me this was the language that came and it had soul resonances my sense of the energy body was that they the energy body were creatively and definitely other than me so rather than i am the energy body and it was me or it's part of me the sense was that they were definitely creatively and definitely other than me so we talk about tunas in soul making practice sometimes they were taking up a space somewhat larger than my physical body though overlapping with it and i had a strong sense of their autonomy and intelligence i've not really worked with energy body as image rather than as the terrain in which image and sensitivity to image arise but i've heard you speak to this possibility so i really tried to lean into it using the nodes of the lattice to tune and sense and what opened was a gorgeous sense of tunas with the energy body and a sense that they the energy body were taking me under their wing teaching me how to be in the right relationship with them i would say that my relationship with pete on this retreat and in general has been pretty dysfunctional tight with self and grasping and aversion when pete arose in this experience with the energy body last night though it felt like they the energy body were giving it to me they were giving it to me saying here try feeling this and holding it for me while i worked and played taking the pressure off and coaching me to try different things i found i could stay with intensities and subtleties i hadn't been able to stay with before because now they were being given to me as gift by this beautiful unfathomable other it was freeing and energizing and humbling so i'd be interested to hear any thoughts you have and specifically around allowing and inviting a sense allowing or inviting a sense of imagine or other into the base practice in some ways what unfolded wasn't all that different from the energy body base practices you outlined on this retreat but there was a strong sense of being in tunas with mysterious otherness that ignited and aligned my desire intention and effort where they've been quite confused or limp through most much of this retreat i still feel very far from jhana but i feel like i've begun to see the possibility of writing something in relation to why and how i practice thank you for reading all this i'm sorry so long um and then a ps actually a couple more thoughts around intention my intention in working with the frustration was for soul making rather than samadhi it was a surprise to me when the pt arose and even when it did i'd say the intention continued to be predominantly for soul making for the beauty of that dimensional relationship with the energy body in subsequent sittings with the intention for samadhi so she returned with to the intention of samadhi i've tried to invite that imagine or sense of the energy body that they haven't come so perhaps it's that this soulful experience with the energy body now becomes part of the fantasy operating the background of samadhi practice that was one of the options if you remember that i talked about we work with an image and then it goes into the background as a fantasy and helps support things or she continues or i can choose to pick it up more intentionally in soul making practice question mark so i wrote i didn't have time but i wrote a quick note back to her and suggested she did the second of those options choose to pick it up more intentionally as a soul making practice with the intention for soul making not for samadhi so something had happened here for you know good reason some difficulty some knots over the time around intention and desire and goal you know things that we were dwelling on and returning to several times and retreat so much importance so much need to give careful attention to that to inquire to that to find right relationship with desire intention goal aim direction so kind of a long-standing history of duhkhar and entanglement and difficulty there so actually my sense was here much much more helpful stay with the soul making looks something extremely important and extremely beautiful has just happened a real gift a real grace you feel that and something that is perhaps the beginning of a much more profound and long-lasting healing if i think i'm on a genre treat i want to catch up with the others or whatever it is and i'd rush too quickly back to the samadhi intention something hasn't been allowed to ripen it needs to me it sounded like it needed longer in in that intention stay with the soul making intention that's what opened things up anyway it's delivering something beautiful it's delivering the p.t and the gorgeousness etc and something is being healed and something is also being insold the duhkhar is being insold the energy body is being insold lots of things lots of things are happening that are really profoundly important and maybe more important than whether i attain ex jhana right now or even in the next months or whatever it is so that was my brief encouragement in a low back and i'm i i really think that's important and then i got a short response saying um thank you wonderful i'm so ready to put down the intention for samadhi um i don't know if i was hearing it right but i was a little concerned getting that note that there's a there's a difference making a choice okay now i'm going to intend uh have a soul making intention rather than samadhi intention we talked about the intention really being primary thing that drives this or that practice whether i'm navigating a fork in the road between insight ways of looking and samadhi or soul making in samadhi or whatever it is it's the intention that's really important for a number of reasons but there's a difference between intention coming out of an aversion and a fed-upness and an intention coming out of love and desire and a sense of grace um and wanting something wanting something is different wanting soul making is different than just really not wanting to be anymore with a certain intention for samadhi so i'm not sure and um it was right at the end of the retreat so i don't know but i didn't get a chance to find out or respond but i i would just and it may not be the case at all for this person but i think my my what i want to say right now is careful about these kind of choices it's a different thing and where there's been a habit of aversion or making choices out of aversion or getting so fed up with a certain situation or situations or how things are unfolding or not unfolding that we feel a lot of aversion and frustration and then the intention is coming out of that that intention coming from aversion will have a different effect than an intention coming out of love for something or eros for something or responding to an invitation of an erotic beloved mother you understand this is really really important and i i would guess that they will unfold differently because it was the same move but the intention is slightly i'm choosing choosing the soul-making intention over samadhi intention but the intention the dominant intention is slightly different one is eros and one is aversion and that probably will make a difference so as i said don't know if it's the case with this person but uh it's the the point this bear is making in a general way because it applies very very widely so this is all part of getting wise to desire and eros and and this whole territory these meta questions are so so important how we how we respond to them how we hold them and how we choose in relationship to them okay so that's all i wanted to add a sort of p s to the whole retreat i hope i hope some of that has been helpful will be helpful at some point okay actually one one last thing i forgot uh someone was asking about resource and i had mentioned from the beginning of the retreat and emphasized the ability of jhanas our practice of jhanas to really form and open up for us a profound resource of well-being in our life and restressing that their function their potential function for us as deep resources so just to elaborate on this a little bit and draw out some of the other things i've been saying to make something clear here this person was asking so yeah if one only experiences a jhana you know once or twice or a few times it might be that shortly you know for some period after those jhana experiences if they're strong whatever that there is um a relatively short-lived sense of resource of happiness of well-being of energy etc the kind of unshakeability that might come with that even from just feeling so happy or whatever it is excuse me but the danger as i think i've alluded to already on the retreat the danger with only having jhanic experience a few times is that then it goes and it's not around and it may become through the memory an object of attachment and duality with what we experience now compared to the jhanic experience and then it's not really uh it's run out of any anything it's giving us as a resource it's not providing anything as a resource but even worse than that it's actually fostering a sense of suffering through the duality through the attachment to the memory etc much more significant is when we are able to frequently practice and experience uh a jhanic state perhaps every day or um maybe a couple of times a day whatever it is in our busy lives etc maybe maybe not even every day but regularly enough and that it functions as a more constant source like a well that isn't going dry and or a spring and there's a sense of replenishment that it brings of rejuvenation of energy the energy is being replenished rejuvenated and um a deep emotional well-being that of different flavors and kinds depending on what jhana we're talking about but that deep emotional well-being allows us or supports us helps us to stay steady and to meet difficulties to sustain our creative projects the work that we're doing when there is difficulty to sustain our service work if that's what we're involved in our activism or whatever it is and through the ups and downs through the knocks through the slog of that and sometimes it might be you know work that's not uh either well paid financially or we're not getting any uh pats on the back for it or recognition or even no one else seems to notice but this dipping in regularly drinking from these wells these beautiful springs of cool clear water will definitely provide resource in our life but there's a third there's a second way that I want to emphasize and actually in a way it's implicit in stuff I said on the retreat but I really want to draw it out to make it clear um long-term repeated uh immersion exposure to immersion in and exposure to you know jhanic states let's say second jhana and above I would say long-term repeated immersion and drinking from that and suffusing the body in that and dissolving and being absorbed in that long-term repeated practice of jhana's will open and deepen the sense we have of what a human being is what we are as human beings but also what other human beings are it opens and deepens the very sense of the dimensionality of human beings so human is our sense of our own being becomes dimensional so near the beginning of the retreat the jhana's become almost like dimensions of human being they're also dimensions of being more generally or cosmic being especially as we go deeper into the jhana so that opening and deepening a sense of dimensionality not just of our own being a human being but also of the cosmos and it's this add another in addition to the way it worked as a resource and just describe is this this opening up of the sense of dimensionality that even if for some reason later in our life the jhana's are not accessible maybe there's certain life situations where we're just not able to practice for some reason maybe there's a severe illness maybe there's medicine trying to treat a severe illness and that medicine is having all kinds of difficult side effects and preventing clarity of mind or preventing concentration or preventing mental energy or whatever it is for whatever other reason even when the jhana's become not accessible they still function something has been seen and sensed and known by the being by the citta so that they still function after all that time and it could be years as a resource one senses still and knows something knows something about one's own being about human being and about the cosmos and that that knowledge if you like if we call that sense of things is there even if one can't touch it or see it right now you understand it's been it's imprinted on the psyche on the chitta and the heart and mind so profoundly and opened up and changed and dimensionalized the sense of things and that one knows it's true and that even when one can't touch it anymore and that knowledge acts as a long-term long-term support for the citta for the soul i said it even when including when circumstances in one way or another may be very very challenging so there's two two levels there if you like of the way in which jhana's can function as a really profound and helpful resource for our lives and for meeting life and opening to life and uh doing serving what we want to serve in life please consider supporting dharmasid with a year-end gift your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all visit dharmasid.org donate to learn more and thanks

 Thank you. Thank you, sorry. So, hopefully you could get a sense of what you've put in to the time here and to your practice and hopefully you could get a sense of really appreciating that. Can you hear me? Is that a no? How's that? It worked? Good. Okay, so, yeah, it's really, really important to have that sense of appreciation, you know, almost independent of how you assess the results from the perspective of the mind state right now. The mind state with hindrances, not hindrances, and we judge this or that, how it's going, how I am, how my practice is, etc. Success, failure, but just independent of that to really be able to appreciate the efforts and the dedication and the consistency. So I know certainly, as Robert said, before he left and Kirsten before she went on retreat and Sari and I, we really, really appreciate what you've put in to your practice, the efforts you've made, your willingness to work and play, your love of exploration, all that. And I hope, I hope that you have got a little taste, a little sense of the beauty of this kind of practice and a little sense perhaps of its possibilities, the possibilities here and the kind of art and magic that can be involved, I think. I know at least some of you have that sense. So I hope you got a little taste of the loveliness and I know that for everyone it will have been difficult and it has been difficult and challenging in lots of different ways at times. And that's also part of what we need to appreciate in ourselves, our willingness to just keep showing up and keep working and playing when it's difficult in all these different ways. And we've talked about the difficulties that come when we have a desire or desires, an aim, a goal, a direction, the difficulties that come when we want to stay steady with a certain intention over not just an hour but over days and weeks and then years or whatever. And the inner critic, the self, the propensity in our culture for self-measurement, self-judgment, these are all, this is all part of the difficult terrain that we have to kind of somehow navigate, somehow relate to wisely with these kinds of practices. So really thank you for all of that. It involves a lot. It's a big deal. So transitioning out of the retreat, you know, you've all done lots of retreats before. It's a little bit different, this retreat, it's different than say some retreats where you really close the senses and you're really looking, really narrowing down to a microscopic attention. Usually the transition from that kind of retreat is quite, can be quite jarring, needs a lot of care. And you've been, you know, if you've been really slowing down, etc. But here, because we've had this emphasis on more openness of awareness, more inclusion of appreciation in the senses, that kind of sort of trauma of sudden sense stimulation is usually not such an issue on this retreat. It shouldn't be such an issue. What may be more asking for a little more care is the heart. So sometimes, again, on this country, the heart becomes very open, very sensitive in lovely ways. And so that needs some care. As you move, take your journeys home, wherever you're going, as you encounter friends and family again, as you move through the coming days. Do you know, do we know how to take care of our heart? What does that really mean? That's a huge subject, huge subject. What does it mean to take care of the sensitive heart? Actually, I don't know how was breakfast for you with the, with some of you a bit buzzing after that? Maybe, maybe not. Yeah, depends again on what kind of retreat. But that's quite a lot of sense stimulation, suddenly talking and the room full of people talking. Probably a lot of energy gathered over three weeks, etc. Quite loud. And so what does that kind of what does that kind of buzz need if there is such a thing? And in terms of caring for the heart, you know, when we when you go wherever you're going, caring, caring for the heart, caring for your relationships, the relationships with the people in your life and your loved ones, which means also caring about what you share or how you share or when you share and with whom. So it's you might be super excited about what you've uncovered, discovered, or you might be just one event after the retreat or whatever it is. But who am I sharing with? And is it the right moment? Are they in the right space? Am I in the right space? Why am I sharing? What am I looking for here? So it's not, of course, sharing is really, really important. But sometimes we like everything. We need to be attuned because if it's not the right time for this person or they're not really a person who's actually that interested or I'm wanting something and I'm not fully conscious that I'm wanting something from the sharing. And I'm not clear that I want with the other person. This is what I want. When I share, I would like you to listen this way or I would like this kind of interest or that kind of interest or whatever it is. That's also to care for that, which means to enter into that with awareness, responsiveness, attunement. This is also really, really important in terms of caring for the heart. So, you know, hopefully everyone's going back to a full and engaged life of practice, both informally and formally in terms of daily daily practice. This is mostly what I want to talk about now. I feel that most people do better if they have periods in their life where they're kind of decided to explore a certain practice or a certain element of a practice. So just as we have here, we're doing jhanas and we talked about a playground and all that. But this could apply to any practice. So you could go home now and decide, well, actually, I want to do metapractice or whatever it is. But just the idea of having a period, a week, a month, six weeks, three months, whatever it is, some delineated period where I'm intending to explore this in my daily sitting, perhaps also in my informal practice off the cushion. And I have a playground. And then after that period is finished, after a week or whatever, then I review. I'm really this is I'm really learning a lot. I want to keep going. I'll do another week or another month or whatever it is. Or that was good. But I want to do something else now. And then you set another period. And again, the intention is steady and there's a playground, a learning playground. I not everyone, but I tend to feel that people learn and develop much, much better that way. And within that within the playground, there needs to be creativity, experimentation, playfulness. Actually, you need to actually play and practice. So with the steady intention, with the playground, then I just have fun. And I try this and I try that. And I'm doing different things. A lot of them really small, small little things. So this applies to all practice. We've talked about it a lot on this retreat in terms of genres, but actually applies to all practices, all practices. So oftentimes people don't find or kind of sort of only really make progress on retreat and outside of retreat. I'm just kind of treading water and just kind of putting my time in and the practice just kind of kind of or maybe even falling apart. And usually it's because they're not allowing themselves to play. They're not allowing. I'm not allowing myself to be creative within this steady intention and playground. And of course, it dries up. There's no juice there. There's no creative, playful input. So we can think of and I think it's a really good idea to think of kind of different practice. I don't know, streams, you know, so that, you know, a lot of stuff comes up in our lives at home and work and whatever. And sometimes it can be just, oh, this has come up and now this has come up. OK, this is what I'm trying to deal with. This is what I'm trying to sit with. This is what I'm trying to meet. And there's a place for all that. But we could also have this idea that this is what I'm exploring. I'm exploring this practice. I'm exploring that practice. And then this or that comes up at work or in relationship or whatever. And because I'm exploring this practice right now, then that suggests certain ways of working with what's coming up as opposed to I'm just putting time into sitting and then kind of trying to cope with what comes up in my life. So just as on this retreat, we had a certain preference in terms of how we would work with emotions. Right. If it was a different retreat, if it was a retreat about emotions, that preference would be reversed and we would be doing lots of different things. But the practice determines how I am with what comes up. You understand? So if we think of different practice streams, you know, you've got the whole insight ways of looking thing. You've got samadhi and jhana practice. You've got soul making dharma. You've got brahma, the horrors. You've got emotions, emotional awareness, emotional skill, the whole realm of psychology and being inquiring of being skillful with one's psychology. One could take just some of the elements of right speech and have periods where I'm just exploring the expression of what is difficult, of what's hard for someone to hear. And that's what I'm doing. That's what I'm most interested in in the next few weeks. Or I'm exploring generosity. So having a theme and really, really exploring that many, many possibilities. The four foundations of mindfulness, one foundation of mindfulness, or if one's going back to a life of activism and engagement, how to really make that practice. It's very hectic and very intense. And within these different streams of practice, we can have different, we have our different playgrounds. So within jhana practice, we still have our different playgrounds. Within insight ways of looking, we have the different playgrounds. Someone was asking, is it possible to explain, you know, I've talked in the past about skillful fabrication, now we're talking about unfabricating, and what's the relationship between those two, and then what's the relationship between those two, and jhana practice and emptiness and soul making. And I've talked about that elsewhere. It's complex, but it's really, really important to understand. I think for now, what might be important is just to think in terms of these different streams of practice. Where my playground is, and listening and reading in collaboration with whatever my playground is, so that in time, I begin to understand more the conceptual frameworks of each practice, and how each relates to the other, etc. And we can have a big mandala of different practices, and it fits like a mandala, it fits very coherently together to make something very beautiful. So it might be, you know, periods for example, jhana practice, and you might feel after this retreat, oh, that's what I want to do, but it doesn't have to be. And just to say as well, if you choose insight ways of looking, if you pick up on this idea and you want to choose something like insight ways of looking, then how much, it's really good to do samadhi practice or brahmivihara practice in combination with, or to balance out the insight ways of looking. How much, what the ratio is, whether it's 50-50 or even 80-20 or 20-80 or whatever it is, you can experiment with that. But it also doesn't need to be in the order, like I said, first I do my samadhi and calm my mind down and get my focus, and then I do my insight. It doesn't have to be that way. I'm feeling wretched and restless and agitated and pissed off and confused. I bring in, I could do my samadhi, I could bring an insight way of looking to that. And if it's working, because it was we've talked about, because there's the release of clinging there, etc., it should calm things down. And then open things up, and then I can go to my samadhi. So don't really get out of this whole idea of there's an order. First I prepare my mind with the concentration, then I do my insight. It really doesn't need to work that way. And of course, if you're choosing different themes, there are, you know, there may be the, I'll come back to this later, but there's the possibility of, you know, working together, making groups, connecting with each other, and having themed groups where you practice together with a certain theme for a while. Like, for example, write speech, or an element of write speech, or generosity. And you go out and you play with something in the week with generosity, you come back and you compare notes, and you really see, wow, the power of that, and you learn from each other. And of course, there may be groups where there is a teacher and things like that. I'm hoping, one of the things I hope before I die is that I will be able to, how shall we say, I don't know what the word would be, but make it clear in these different streams of practice, like who's a sort of qualified teacher in this stream of practice, or in that stream of practice. I'm hoping that that will be possible. I've only made a very little headway with that, but I'm really hoping that that will be possible. So you can kind of know where to go if you want to explore this practice or that practice. In the meantime, though, there is already running an emptiness group online that meets every two weeks, I think. And Sari is teaching with Nathan and Yuhar hasn't started yet because he's been on retreat for three months, but he will be one of the teachers. And Susie Keeley, who most of you probably don't know, and Yael, who's a teacher in Israel. And so that exists in the meantime, and very lovely from what I've heard. And for people who want to explore emptiness, you can learn a lot there and share together and benefit from that. So I think Nathan will put up some info for that on the board afterwards. So just in terms of Jhana practice, the arising of Jhana or the arising of somebody depends on a lot of conditions. A lot of conditions need to come together. It's very, very, very possible of retreat. So it's not something that needs to be confined to retreat. If you find it's confined to retreat, then the question is, why is it confined to retreat? It's dependent on conditions. Someone asked me, do I have to avoid orgasm in order to practice Jhana? Absolutely not. Absolutely not. Where does this idea come from? Or I have to avoid sex, or I have to have a special diet or something like that. What is it we have to not have? Entanglement. Entanglement in the hindrances. It's not even that we need to not have the hindrances. Entanglement in the hindrances. So withdrawn, when the Buddha says withdrawn or in seclusion from the hindrances, it means withdrawn from entanglement, not entangled in whatever is going on in my life. That's the condition. More than anything else. So it's not that I've got a busy job, or this or that, or whatever. Or relationships tricky at the moment. It's how much the heart and mind are entangled. That's what makes the difference. So it's certainly not true that one has to be celibate or not have sex, or only practice Taoist non-ejectulatory orgasms, or whatever it is. There is that teaching out there, and that has its place and whatever. But sometimes it gets people who are into that get a little bit limited in the view. So whether an orgasm brings energy or depletes energy, again, is dependent on a lot of factors. So we're lay people, and if that's part of your life, you have to really explore this. Whether sex and orgasm depletes energy or actually allows energy depends on things like what was the quality of love, what was the quality of soul connection involved, the openness. That's much more significant than regarding energy than the fact of orgasm or something. And much more significant in terms of jhanic availability and that sort of thing. Similarly with diet, you can get these ideas. We have to find out for oneself. And I speak as someone who's got an absolutely tormented digestive system for the last 35 years or something. Find out for you what works. Don't buy the theories. Don't come in. Don't be within 150 meters of a clove of garlic, because it's just not... Find out if it's true for you or not. And sometimes we get... what's it that I've made? Sattvic and... Is that the...? What's the first one? The pure one? Sattvic, yeah. So don't get the Sattvic neurosis about all this, you know? Experiment, play, creativity, willingness to play in practice but also around practice with stuff like diet and whatever else. It's really, really important. So you can discover a lot, a lot, a lot on your own, a lot about all these kinds of things. And all being well, the recordings from this retreat should be available sometime. And they should be, I'm hoping they'll be very, very helpful and helpful now, as soon as you get hold of them, and helpful for, in fact, years to come. There is a tremendous amount of information on them. You may not realize, but it's probably almost impossible to pick up all that information just in the three weeks in your first listening. There's a lot of the questions, you know, naturally you'd have were, in fact, already there, already given. There's just too much information. So it's there and they should be helpful, I hope. And in terms of samadhi practice, don't forget about things like we had the... do you remember right on the opening, we did that counting with the breath? It takes a little while to get used to, but for some people it will be a really potent practice, really, really useful. It can feel really awkward at first with the long breath and the counting, whatever, but something like that really worth developing, you know. So think about all the tools that you might have. One, or I think one of the lovely things about jhana practice is, especially if we do it this way, where there's a kind of emphasis on marinating and mastery, is that you could go away and not do any retreats for a year and then come back on retreat. And it's a bit like putting a bookmark in a book and leaving it on a shelf for a year, and you open the book again and the bookmark is in the same place. Your playground, your edge playground is pretty much in the same place, if I've practiced in this way that we've emphasized with the mastery and the marinating and the staying and not just rushed through. So that's a very lovely thing. In other words, you don't need to be in a rush to... and a kind of, you know, slightly tight, I need to keep up my jhana practice, otherwise next time I'll go on retreat it won't be there. It doesn't need to be like that. There is this kind of mysterious bookmark magic thing as well. But I hope to, you know, we've talked about, or it's become, you know, it was clear that it was like really important to talk about other larger questions, meta questions about desire, for example, and the relationships with desire and what goes on for us with desire and what's included in my desire and what exactly is my desires. Are my desires? Meta questions about desire and about conceptual frameworks. I hope that that you begin to realize that these things are important and that those questions become actually part of your practice, the exploring of the relationship with desire, the exploring of the relationship with conceptual frameworks and the exploring of conceptual frameworks. So even understanding that conceptual frameworks are important to understand, that's already something that's really, really major. Huge. You know, I think I've already said, but without it, without a conceptual framework, dramatic experiences can just be like there's a wow, but they don't actually liberate very much or they're not very transformative. They're not very helpful. They're not as opening as they could be. It's the conceptual framework that gives power to the experience. Or it may be without a conceptual framework or with a conceptual framework that isn't quite coherent or that's a bit kind of incongruent. It doesn't really fit together with itself or it doesn't fit together with the way I'm practicing. This can just actually create confusion or a kind of myopia in practice where one's just looking at the experience that I've just had and it's sort of a bit mesmerized by the experience, but it doesn't really reach out and spread its effect in the life. Or even more problematic, it can be because of that, a kind of narrowing of what our practice is. Sometimes people are doing the same practice for 20 years. Why? Because there's no conceptual framework. So even they're not quite sure how that practice fits in with the rest of the Dharma or other practices. So the whole Dharma can shrink and the whole sense of what practice can shrink, what practices can shrink. So I really hope that you feel that you've learnt not just about samadhi and jhanas and that sort of thing, but also about desire and your patterns with desire and having goals and aim and a direction and staying steady with intention. All that stuff mirrors our life. So whatever we've bumped into here around desire, around feeling confined in a certain intention, I want to do this, I want to do that, feeling restless within it, whatever patterns around that, whatever problems we experience when we set a goal or an aim or a fear of doing so, all that on retreat, it just mirrors life. The same thing. In a critic, the difficulty to sustain, you know, singleness of intention, the wobbling, the ambivalence, am I in the right place? Am I doing the right thing? I should be somewhere else. The doubt, the hindrances, becoming papancha and then becoming so convincing, this is life stuff. It's not just retreat stuff, meditative stuff, it's life stuff. Feeling imprisoned in a form, in an intention, in a group, in a relationship, this is life stuff, all of that. I hope that because we've talked about it, we've kept returning to this. I hope that you can really see that these elements are really, really important, sort of meta elements in relation to practice, but of course in relation to our life, of course. And as I said several times on the street, they may end up being much more important than whether I attain this or that jhana. How I am with these things, what I learn with these things. So there's all kinds of streams of practice and within that there's different playgrounds that one might have. And as I said, there's groups and sometimes it's really, really we learn better with each other. So we might find a group where there's a teacher or teachers or whatever and that's great, but also peer groups, you know, working together as I mentioned before. I was thinking about this, I'm not sure if jhana practice would work so well as a peer group. Maybe it would, I'm not sure, but my sense is it might be a little more tricky with people being in different places or progressing at very different rates or whatever. Again, because of lots of different conditions, lots of different conditions. But it might, something to find out. Something like emptiness or studying emptiness or soul making, for example, may work much better in terms of sangha groups together, study groups, practice groups together, peer groups together. And it might be that jhana practice is more of a solitary endeavor. I don't know. But if you want to experiment, find out. But again, actually, it's interesting with regard to groups because, you know, I was stressed so much about the necessity of clarity with regard to what's the precise mix of my desires. So for my practice, for my life, for this retreat or for a group that I go to, that I form or I'm part of, what exactly am I wanting? What are the confluences of my desires and my intentions? So on a soul making retreat, for example, many of you have been on soul making retreats, some of you have been on soul making retreats. You know, there's lots of dyad practice or triad practice and relational practice in the retreat, lots of sharing of images and experiences, lots of intimacy that way, lots of relational practice. And then very easily it might be that, of course, one feels very touched by that sharing and by that intimacy and without realizing it, go and form a soul making as, oh, let's form a soul making group together. But actually, I'm not careful. I'm looking. Oh, actually, my desire is really for the sharing and the sangha, primarily, and less for the soul making. What I really want is a set sharing and the sangha, which is a fantastic desire. It's a really, really important desire. I want connection. I want intimacy with other practitioners. I want that sharing. But if I'm going to, if I set up or going to a soul making group and actually without realizing it and without the others realizing it, I'm actually wanting sangha, primarily. Am I still not soul making? Maybe it's just secondary. Then because of the importance of what I actually desire, because of the determinative effect of what I actually desire in the mix, the soul making will not blossom so well because I'm actually coming at it wanting something else. Do you understand? So groups can fall apart. I've seen groups trying to set up, trying to set up, not really happening, not really happening. What's that? People are not clear about what they're going for. And so it's not really getting off the ground. Or you set up a group about a certain theme and it somehow just becomes a general dharma group or a general, let's just sit together because it's nice to sit together and then we'll kind of share about whatever. All of that's great. And so if that's clear, then that can be the primary intention. The larger point, which I've said so many times on this retreat now, is about the importance of being aware of what my intention is because that will determine what unfolds. So some people are in the group wanting soul making, for example, and some people are just wanting sangha, or primarily wanting sangha. That group is going to be frustrating, probably for both, certainly for the people wanting soul making. Do you understand? And so just staying with that idea of soul making, it's certainly true that soul making practices will build and grow the sense of sangha. Absolutely they will, for sure they will, because of all that lovely intimacy and sharing. But the primacy of intention and our intentions and desires and what they are, the primacy of that in determining what's possible and what unfolds in a group. Or again, it could be that we have a group or even just my dharma practice and the intention is because I want to kind of rectify my energy problems or my energy constrictions. Or I want to heal my energy blocks and not whatever the group was set up for, soul making dharma or this or that or even just dharma in general. And again, that lack of clarity or lack of honesty about what the intentions are will have an effect. Same issues. So this is all stuff to think about going forward. It's all, I feel, really important stuff. But let's end now. I wanted to say thank you to my three helpers. So I see Nick here and Lawrence. But I don't know if Leah's here. She's not here. That's 10 to 12. So so, yeah, I thank you to Nick and Lawrence and Leah, who's not here, because I certainly wouldn't have been able to get here every day. We wouldn't have been able to do this without you guys. So it's really hugely appreciated. And thank you to Sari and to Kirsten and to Robert, who's who's left again. Just so valuable, your help and your input and being there and working together and couldn't have happened. We got you guys. OK, why don't we. Let's just take a moment to dedicate from our practice to you. So just as Sari led us beautifully before. See if you can open to connect with a sense of appreciation for your efforts. Just bypassing the whole question of success, failure and how well you practiced or what you achieved. It's actually impossible to know quite what the fruits of our practice are and will be as time unfolds, as conditions meet other conditions, as what has ripened and matured and been worked on here ripples out into the world in so many different ways. It's impossible to know what the fruits are. It's impossible to assess, measure or judge that. Know that you have shown up, know that you have been willing repeatedly to work through the difficult, through the challenging, through the lovely, that you've been curious. Can you see in that the beauty of your intention over and over, the beauty of your intentions, countless moments of intention, countless, countless rain into the sea, all those raindrops of beautiful intention, of willingness, of courage, dignity, nobility, effort, wisdom, responsiveness. All that makes karma. It has effects. We don't know. We cannot know all the effects. In the wide, wild mystery of things, we cannot know the course of all that water, all the ripplings out. But somehow, in the mystery of interconnectedness, in the mystery of dependent arising, may the goodness and beauty of our intention, of our work, of our efforts, may it be for the benefit of those near and dear to us, those who are close to us in life. May it ripple out to touch them, to bless them, perhaps in obvious ways, perhaps in not obvious ways. May they receive the fruits and the blessings of our practice. And all those beings whom we don't really know, but who we encounter in our everyday movements in the world, living their lives, struggling as we do with body, with mind, with relationship. We don't know them, brief encounters here and there. Somehow, may they too receive the blessings and the fruits of our practice. For all beings, we will never meet face to face, we will never encounter directly. And again, somehow, perhaps in obvious, direct ways, somehow in the mystery of things, in not so obvious ways, in indirect ways. May they too be touched, be blessed by the goodness and beauty of our intention. May they receive the blessings and the fruits of our practice. For those whose lives are caught up in war, living in fear, not in safety. May they receive the fruits and blessings of our practice. For those tormented in mind and heart, not at ease. May they receive the fruits and blessings of our practice. For those in the world living in areas of famine, of shortage, of scarcity. May they receive the fruits and blessings of our practice. And for all those beings, human and non-human, whose lives have become hounded by ecological devastation, who have to flee their homes, their homelands. May our practice be of benefit, be of support. May all beings everywhere, without exception, receive the fruits and blessings of our practice. May all beings everywhere, without exception, receive the fruits and blessings of our practice. May all beings everywhere, without exception, receive the fruits and blessings of our practice. Thank you again. Go safely wherever you're going and practice with intelligence, with playfulness, with love and with enjoyment. Sorry, me black, sure, like birthday. I hope I'm getting a cake. Thank you. Please consider supporting DharmaSeed with a year-end gift. Your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all. Visit DharmaSeed.org-slash-donate to learn more. And thanks.

 I think if I remember when they, well it was Kirsten's idea, I remember saying at the beginning, the whole retreat was Kirsten's idea, and when the opportunity came up because of the works, I'm pretty sure I asked can we have a month, and for whatever reasons they said, well this is what we got, just over three weeks. So I feel a little bit like, I don't know how you feel, desperate to go home, but get out of here, but in a way I feel like I'm sort of rushing at the end and running out of time and not quite having time to say certain things. I certainly wish very much that I had had more opportunity to meet with you individually, interviews and things, and Q&As and things, but like I said at the beginning, there's a lot of, in many ways, that just the fact of this retreat has been a miracle, the fact that the conditions came together to allow that this. So we're doing the best we can, and that's good. So a little bit rushed, and I'm partly wondering how you're doing with, especially these later talks, when I'm not really talking at the level, I'm not really talking about your playgrounds anymore, your learning edge playgrounds, how are you doing, how do they land. It's, as I said, in our modern or post-modern society, whatever you want to see that, it's completely okay if this kind of stuff like these deep mystical states and all these kind of openings, it's really okay, and I really feel this way as well, genuinely feels it's really okay if you're not interested, and that's a perfectly valid sort of relationship to have with it. Of course, some people will be absolutely very interested and fascinated and drawn and allured, etc., but it's really okay if one isn't. Someone might be, or some people might be thinking, I don't feel interested now, but it's probably because of my psychological dukkha or whatever it is. Once I've got over that, then I'll be interested, I imagine. It may be the case. I would kind of tend to more guess that if you're not interested anyway, you're not just not, you're not going to be interested. So if one isn't interested in this kind of thing, one will never probably be interested. It's not like a certain amount of healing has to happen or psychological clearing of the path, and then one will get interested. So these things are interesting to some people and really passionately, you know, almost interesting to some people and not so much to others. The technical information I've been putting, or the information about technique I've been putting out in these last talks, you know, because we're not really talking about your, I keep remembering that, forgetting that phrase, learning edge playground, because I'm not, for most of you, almost all of you at this point, not really talking about your learning edge playground. The technical information is really for later, and you can come, as far as I can tell, it's being recorded by like three or four different recorders. So it should be, unless there's like a worldwide internet crash, which it should be accessible to you if and when the time comes that these territories do become your learning edge playgrounds. But the big picture stuff and the conceptual framework stuff will also be very relevant then when you come to this stuff, and it's absolutely relevant now. So the big picture stuff and the conceptual framework stuff is not stuff that you have to write down. In a way, it makes more sense for you to write as you're taking notes, to take notes on the bigger picture conceptual framework stuff, then on the little tricks of getting into from the 7th, the 8th, John. I mean, you're obviously welcome to write whatever you want, but again, I just, so much emphasis on the big understanding, the big picture and the conceptual framework. That's relevant now. What's also relevant is when we've dipped into talking several times or drawn in to the conversation and the teachings, the reflections on desire and the inquiry into desire and the inquiry into intention and the relationship with what is it to keep my intention on something that I desire, and how am I with desire and what happens with me with desire? Those things will be relevant then when you're working on the 8th genre or whatever it is, but they're relevant now. And as I said, these things, big picture, conceptual framework, desire and intention, these things are, if you like, more fundamental than can I move from this genre to that genre. But sometimes we kind of human beings have a habit of listening with the wrong set of priorities or the wrong, not quite a developed sense of actually what's most important. I've said all this before. Understanding the big picture, understanding the conceptual framework is actually rare. It's very rare, and I've said that before. So yesterday, yesterday we talked about the realm of neither perception or non perception. And today I would like to talk about what's beyond that, the unfabricated, the deathless, the asankata, or what is asankata, the mother. The asankata is related to the sankara usually gets translated as conditioned, conditioned, or conditioned, sankata is to be conditioned or fabricated. So the unfabricated, the unconditioned. Now, all this business about we're being quite rushed is that's not the end of the story to me. Opening to realizing the unconditioned, the unfabricated, absolutely wonderful and important as that is, is not the end of the story. For some people it is, or for some maps of the Dharma it is. But even that is becoming actually quite rare in the Dharma world. Even any kind of importance given to this, I don't even know the word for it, the realm of the unfabricated or the unfabricated, this complete fading. That's actually getting rarer and rarer in a lot of Dharma worlds, I think in the insight meditation world certainly. But in my book it's extremely important, extremely touching, beautiful, liberating, but it's kind of like half the story if you like. And the other half has to do with emptiness, which goes even deeper than the unfabricated. Now, unfabricated is important for emptiness, but emptiness in its full understanding goes even deeper. I have written about and explained all this elsewhere a lot and I'm not going to do it again today. This business about going beyond the unfabricated is in seeing that freeze in the chapters, kind of leading up to and then after the bits about the unfabricated in a lot of detail, in a lot of practical detail and also conceptual detail. I've written and spoken about it, as I said, in a lot of detail about the unfabricated, about how that opens up in practice, about what it means to go beyond it and how that opens up in practice, about the relationship of both of those stages to emptiness and liberation, and about the whole philosophy, the kinds of philosophical questions that are implicit in all that about reality and how we know what's real, how we can trust what's real. So ontology and epistemology. I've written and talked about it a lot in where you'd expect to find it in the Seeing That Freeze, a book about emptiness and talks about emptiness, etc. But there's also a lot of that material and a lot of different approaches and even further kind of elaborations of that material in talks about soul making, in soul making Dharma talks, because it's actually woven into all that and has a lot of implications philosophically for all that territory. So I got a note saying, would it fit, is there any space in tonight's talk to be able to distinguish the terms dependent origination and emptiness, maybe also codependent arising lack of inherent existence. I anyway thought of them as synonymous. So the short answer is no. Unfortunately, there isn't quite enough time. I can say something very brief now, but it is all in that material. It's all there. I think it's really, really clear. I really took a lot of trouble being really, really clear. Every word means something implies something. Certainly in the writing and in the, obviously the verbal teaching is a bit more loose, but it's there to briefly for this. So this isn't a talk about emptiness primarily. It's talk primarily about the Unfabricated, but briefly in terms of this question. So part of the problem is terms like dependent origination and emptiness get used in a lot of different ways in the Dharma, even in the insight meditation world. You'll find that we could list, I don't know how many different ways they are used. And I would say the same term understood at very different levels, which a person might using it in a certain level might think, well, that's the total thing. That's the final level of understanding. But someone else might, or as I would rank those kind of as provisional levels of understanding. You understand? So it gets quite tricky trying to untangle all that. But briefly, dependent origination, we could say, okay, this book is a dependent arising, which means what? Well, someone sat down and spent a lot of time writing it. The paper had to come from trees. Someone had to cut down the trees and take it to a paper mill and make paper out of it. And then there was the ink and whoever, however the person, the author had to practice and study a lot. All these are the book arose dependently on all those conditions. Yeah, understand that? Yeah. Okay, that's all really, really important and lovely and can give a nice sense of interconnectedness with everything. But it won't do that much for liberation. Okay. So the primary emphasis I put on understanding dependent origination is dependent on the mind dependent on the way of looking. So we've seen this when we talked about working with pain on this retreat, I hears the pain, it is a pain, it seems to I'll weave in the other word, it seems to inherently exist, it just exists. It is what it is. It's a pain and it hurts. When I find I play with perception, I look at it in a different way, I find that, oh, it's become a pleasure, it's become pity, it does not exist inherently as pain. Okay, it doesn't exist from its own side, the Tibetans say, it's dependent, it dependently arises, it dependently originates, primarily most important thing for liberation, I would emphasize it dependently originates on the way of looking in the moment. Do you understand? Yes. Okay, so that's, we could say much, much more about these terms. Co-dependent arising is just, let's say for now, just the same thing and I'll weave it into later in the talk. Lack of inherent existence is at one level, at one level synonymous with emptiness, or dependent arising. In other words, to say that this pain lacks inherent existence is, as many of you have seen for yourselves and felt for yourselves in meditation already, to say that this pain lacks inherent existence is just the same thing as saying, without my looking at it in my normal habitual reactive ways, it does not arise and exist for me as pain. Yes, it lacks inherent existence, what do you say, lacks an independent existence. Okay, and that's just the same thing as saying it's empty, and it's just the same thing as it arises dependently, on dependent on the way of looking. Yeah, so very brief answer for that. Is that okay? Yes. Okie dokie. So, so that in order that you don't get quite confused, or rather more confused than you may already be, you should probably know that this way, as I'm about to talk today, and the way that I've written about and talked about other times, this way of talking about the unfabricated, and this way of talking about the fabricated, and this whole idea of insight ways of looking, being ways of looking, ways of relating in the moment that reduce clinging, and through reducing clinging, fabricate less, and the implication from that, that a thing is therefore empty, to a certain extent, and a dependent arising, and with the implications about its reality. All of that, the way I'm talking about unfabricated, fabricated, insight ways of looking, clinging, unfabricating, emptiness, dependent origination, and the implications for everything, all of that together is rare in the Dharma world. I don't, it's not like you can just expect it to mesh neatly or nicely with other things that you will read in here. So I'm just saying that, I'm not saying it's better or worse, or you're welcome to prefer whatever you prefer, or make more sense, or just that if you approaching something else with the idea, well they must be saying the same thing, you're liable to just get very confused. That's all, and then completely up to you to gravitate to what you gravitate to, explore what you feel drawn to, explore, etc, etc. But if you know that from the start, then you won't just kind of be meshing, trying to mesh things together, which actually don't really mesh that well. So it's rare in the Dharma, this way of talking about these things, and this way of explaining things, and it's very rare, the whole conceptual framework that ties it all together, certainly with the soul making, but even all that tied together, and as I said the understanding is very rare. So it's very, it's very rare for people to really understand this yet. So there's a, there's a passage in the Pali Canon where the Buddha and Ananda are sort of hanging out, and Ananda, remember, he was the Buddha's attendant, so he probably heard, let's probably, let's estimate maybe 90% of the Buddha's teachings, something like that, talks to monks, talks to nuns, talks to laypeople, talks to kings and queens, talks to individual wandering ascetics, question and answer sessions, one-to-one interviews, etc. Over, I don't know how many years, but a lot, a long time, he was just there all the time, all the time, pretty much all the time, and he wasn't, he wasn't a thikko. After the Buddha died, he became an arahant, so he wasn't someone incapable. They're hanging out one day, and he says, and the Buddha says something about dependent arising, and Ananda says, it's so clear, it's so clear to me, it's wonderful this dependent arising, it's just as clear as clear could be, and the Buddha turns to him, said don't say that, Ananda, don't say that, we're talking about something really profound here, profound as a teaching, profound in its manifestation. So, just to contextualize this a little bit, some, and this is an interesting thing as a teacher, because I feel I'm talking, I'm talking to someone, and they're like, oh, I don't understand, I don't understand, and then there's self-judgment, I'm so thick, I'm lost, I'm confused, and all this stuff, and actually they do understand, they do understand very well the beginnings of this thread. Remember I was talking about this whole thing, emptiness, fabrication, dependent arising, it's just a thread, it's the same understanding I'm taking from the most basic level that my mother could understand, who has not meditated for 10 seconds in her whole life, and is not interested in anything. She can understand, when she gets into Papansha, compared to afterwards, that was fabricated, that was less fabricated, there was something unreal there, and there was something, she would just say real here, yeah, it's the same thing, Papansha compared to normal consciousness, normal, and you just keep following that thread. And the person says, I don't understand, I don't understand, actually you do understand, you're on the right thread, and you just need to know that you understand, and keep going. So there are some people like that, and they need encouragement, actually you do understand, just keep following, same inquiry, just keep going, don't freak out. Other people are a bit more like an under, yes, yes, yes, I understand completely, I get it, it's wonderful, and I feel like saying, you don't understand. So the question is, which one are you? And are you able to know which one you are? So again, put this in a little context, I would say, one doesn't understand dependent arising, and emptiness, and all this business, unless one understands that what dependently arises does not arise, and one understands that that is the case for many reasons, what dependently arises does not arise. What is unfabricated is not unfabricated, unless one understands that one hasn't really understood all this business. What is unfabricated is not unfabricated. Where unless one has also understood that when we talk about this fabrication business and ways of looking, we're not talking about, oh yes, it's because the brain processes things like this, or these are the neural circuits, and etc., because we're not talking about something based in materialism or physicalism. Brains, neurons, neurotransmitter, molecules, and atoms, they are empty too. Neither are we talking about the kind of complement in philosophy from materials and mentalism. Everything is projected by the mind. The mind is somehow real, and everything is projected by the mind. Unless one understands all that, one doesn't really fully yet understand this dependent arising business. Unless one understands why there is no trauma, there is no trauma, but we can respect and care for trauma and heal it, but there is no trauma. Unless one understands why there are no ways of looking, but at the same time it's impossible to exist, even for a moment without a way of looking, but there are no ways of looking. Unless one understands that things are not impermanent, but nor are they permanent. Unless one understands that there are no moments, there are no moments of time. One hasn't understood all this yet. Unless one understands that there are many things, and at the same time there are no things, and in a way there's one thing only, or there's many kinds of versions of one thing only, or there are infinite things, all these are true. Many, none, one, infinite, and none of them are true. Unless one understands that there is no suffering and there is no liberation, and unless one understands that emptiness too is emptiness, one hasn't fully yet understood dependent arising. So if you're one of those people who think that you have... that's great. I could go on, we could go on adding to this list, but I need to... we're talking about something very profound, and I'm not going to be able to explain it all today. Everything there, if you really read and listen and practice, obviously, it should actually completely make sense in the heart through practice. So this talk, I'm not going to go into the whole emptiness thing, we don't have time. In a way it's only half of us, so I'm just going to talk about to the unfabricated a little bit, and it's only really a little of what's really a huge area and profound area of understanding and practice. I'm really going to talk about the jhanas and in relationship to the unfabricated. And one more thing, you know, we're not... some of you are a bit new to this fabrication and fading thing, so we should be clear, one isn't going to understand this business about fading and dependent arising and emptiness without practicing what I call insight ways of looking. One is not going to understand that without practicing, really practicing those insight ways of looking like a lot and getting into them and really grappling with that and letting the beauty of that open up. So jhanas are really not the best way to understand fading and emptiness, they're really not the best way to understand fading and emptiness. However, emptiness and fading is part of the best way to understand the jhanas. That's not quite a contradiction what I said. Jhanas are not the best way to understand fading and emptiness, but fading and emptiness are part of the best way to understand the jhanas, along with what we talked about development of sensitivity and attunement and deep resource, etc. So partly the reason I've been going on about emptiness and all that and ways of looking is because it forms the best and most coherent way of understanding the jhanas and placing them coherently in a much bigger picture of the dharma, a picture which makes sense of a lot of possibilities, including soul-making dharma, but even without soul-making dharma. Okay, so that was all before I even start. So it's interesting, whether people use the word or not, fabrication, I would say that most, certainly most insight meditation teachers use the idea of fabrication. They may use that word or not use that word. So when people talk about papansha, whether they use the word fabrication or not, they're suggesting that it's what we call a fabrication in both senses. It's something that the mind has just concocted. That's another word. It's a concoction. It's a construction and with this double meaning that we have in some languages, it's also a lie. And that contrasts with what usually implicitly is something unfabricated, something real or reality, something true or truth. So do you understand? Even if a person isn't using that concept, it's there woven into most insight meditation teachings. Fabrication is a construction, a concoction by the mind and what is not real, it's a lie in some ways. So that unfabricating the fabricated or not fabricating is just part of practice. It's part of what is kind of conveyed in any, actually any dharma teaching, that alone just insight meditation teaching. Not fabricating or unfabricating the fabricate is part of practice. And more than that, implicitly or explicitly, there's an ontology woven. Ontology means a view or philosophy or belief about what is real. So when people talk about papansha, it's even if they don't use the language real or fabricated, the way they talk and the jokes and the humor of it, it's clear like, wasn't that funny because it was completely not real? Right? You understand this? So even if a person doesn't pull all this out, there's fabricated and unfabricated as notions that does make sense. So there's an implicit ontology, implicit view of what's real, and there's an implicit ontological hierarchy that goes. Sometimes it's drawn out, it's made explicit. More often it's implicit. It's not actually talked about in this way, but sometimes it is. In other words, clearly the real is better than the unreal, is preferable. Right? That's woven into it as well. Right? And wrapped up in all that, there's a value judgment involved. It's better. This is a waste of time. This is ridiculous. This is worthless. This is, or even harmful, etc. Most of the time that's just sort of spun into the rhetoric, into the teaching rhetoric, sometimes verbally and sometimes not verbally. And it's not just in insight meditation. It can also be in kind of pop versions of Zen. If you get a bit conceptual, you just get hit on the nose with a stick or whatever. And it's conveying something about what's real or not real, because reality is what's not bound up with concept. Do you understand? Whether one very rarely is there actually a big probing of the philosophical questions and psychological questions here, it's usually conveyed more subliminally, but non-verbally, non-philosophically usually. So whatever kind of dharma we're talking about, not just insight meditation, that's observation. So what is this unfabricated that people may be suggesting or pointing to or kind of is there implicitly without being named? And what is the fabricated again? Whether they use those words or not. So unfabricated, maybe we've touched on this. It's basically what is not papansha, as I just said. So when there's the absence of papansha, we are not fabricating. Or mindfulness reveals what is not fabricated. Mindfulness, less story, less view, less reaction, less conceptual sort of involvement. And that mindfulness or bare attention reveals the unfabricated, even if one doesn't use that language. It cuts fabrication. Does it make sense? Or you may have heard someone say, that's not an emotion. Don't get it. So it's just some sensations. Really, it's just some sensations in the chest. And again, there's the really, the ontological question, the hierarchizing, all that. Or all there really is, not really self and story, all there really is, is the process of the five aggregates in time, including those sensations arising and passing in the chest area, whatever. Or this vast primordial impersonal awareness is regarded as what's real. And the whole concepts or stories of self, if regarded as not real. So whatever language one uses, there is this kind of, as you said, this something that's fabricated, something that's not fabricated, some ontological distinction and hierarchy there, and a value judgments woven in with all that. So when I use the word unfabricated, I don't mean what is, I certainly don't mean what is revealed by bare attention. I certainly don't mean what is there visible to us, sensible to us when there is no thought. I certainly don't mean what's sensible to us, perceivable to us for us when we're calm, without Papancia, without making a fuss in the world. More, I would say it's what appears or what opens when there is no intention whatsoever and no conception whatsoever. I could also say no perception whatsoever. But I have to explain those words because I don't mean by conception, thought. So when I say non-conceptual, I mean much, much more than non-thinking. So concept to me is a much deeper and subtler thing, much more deeply woven into consciousness. And I'll come back to that hopefully in this video. And when I say no intention, I certainly don't mean, or I mean much more than I'm just sitting here being, I'm just being right now, or I'm not doing, or I'm not making any effort, or I have no plans, or anything like that. I mean something much, much more, again, subtle than that. Much more deeply intricate, if that's even a word, into consciousness and how consciousness works. I'll come back to that later. But let's go back to what I said before. There is, in whatever Dharma we're teaching, there is woven into this some kind of idea of the fabricating, the unfabricated. We all use ontological hierarchies and judgments. The question is, where are we limiting the process of unfabricating? So for all these Dharmas, there is a practice that involves unfabricating. The question is, where are we limiting that? Where are we limiting this practice of unfabricating? Where are we drawing the line, drawing the line, saying, ah, that's it now, I'm done with fabrication, or that was a moment of unfabricating. Where are we limiting it? And why are we limiting it there, or here, or wherever we are? Where and why? And why not leave it as an open question? So these are real questions. In other words, what answers someone needs to come up with a really good answer for these questions, I would say. So I'm meaning something quite different by the unfabricated, and we'll return to those questions at the end. I think they're very, very important. But there are lots of texts, excuse me, there are lots of texts where the Buddha describes unfabricated, at least to my reading of them, that sound like what I'm talking about. I'm not going to be able to find them, but... Well, there are texts where, I'm not going to hunt for it right now, but there are texts where the Buddha's describing a state where all perception has ceased. So not even what we were talking about yesterday, the neither perception or non-perception. All perception of a subject, all perception of any kind of object, not even nothing, that's not even a state of neither perception or non-perception. All sense of time, all space, not even a present moment, all of that not there. And there are many texts in the Pali Canon. Some is interesting, a while ago, I don't know whether it's still the case. Some people would say, oh, there's only one place in the Pali Canon where the Buddha talks about such a thing. It's not true, there are many, many places and they're all different. It's not the same little passage getting reprinted. It's lots of different texts pointing to the same experience. I should find one. Let's see, we're just a little bit patient. Well, okay, this one we'll have to do for now. That sphere should be understood, should be known. That dimension, that ayatana should be known, that realm should be known, where the eye ceases and perceptions of forms fades away. There's no sight, no visual objects. That sphere should be known where the ear ceases and the perception of sounds fades away. That sphere should be understood, should be known where the nose and smells, the tongue and taste, the body and perception of tactile objects fades away. That sphere should be understood where the mind ceases and perception of mental phenomena fades away. By mental phenomena, it doesn't just mean thought, it means any mental perception. So perception of ajana, perception of the neither perception, neither perception on non-perception, perception of nothingness, any perception at all. So talking about something completely beyond perception of matter, completely beyond any kind of measurement, completely beyond any kind of perception, any subject, any object, any sense of time, even a present moment. No space, no nothing. So as I said, there used to be, I don't know if it's still, I think it probably still is the case, people say, no, there's only one passage, but actually, and it's in seeing the freeze if you're interested, there's many, many passages in different ways describe such an opening and such a realm, place, whatever we want to call that. Some people really don't like that, and some people really oppose such a teaching. That's always quite interesting to me. Some people use some of those passages or use words like the unfabricated, but if you listen to what's being said or if you follow the teachings, they're actually using unfabricated, synonymous with awareness, often vastness of awareness and claiming that is the unfabricated, that is the ultimate, or that's the nature of mind, whatever. Occasionally, very occasionally, someone is rarely, it's usually people haven't been practicing that long, certainly not teachers, I never heard a teacher say this, but occasionally, again, things, someone construes the unfabricated as just things as they are, as seen or as sensed, as revealed with bare attention or mindfulness. Sometimes people use either parts of these quotes or the word unfabricated, but in quite different ways. Very briefly, we're talking about if yesterday's language, stretch language to the limit, here it's really gone beyond the pale. The Buddha sometimes talks in positive language here. There is, as I said, something, that passage we just read, this should be known, that dimension should be known, it's as if it's a something that should be known. There's another passage I'll read where he says, here with regard to earth, the perception of earth has disappeared. With regard to liquid, the perception of liquid has disappeared. With regard to fire, the perception of fire has disappeared. With regard to wind, the perception of wind has disappeared, in other words, with regard to materiality, that was the physics in their days. With regard to materiality, the perception of materiality has disappeared. With regard to the realm of infinite space, the perception of the realm of infinite space has disappeared, with regard to the sphere of infinite consciousness, the perception of the sphere of infinite consciousness has disappeared, with regard to the sphere of nothingness, the perception of the sphere of nothingness has disappeared, with regard to the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception, the perception of the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception has disappeared, with regard to this world, this world, the perception of this world has disappeared, with regard to the next world, the perception of the next world has disappeared. Whatever is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought after, or explored by the mind, the perception of that has disappeared. Absorbed in this way, some are defied in this way, one is absorbed dependent neither on earth, liquid, fire, wind, dependent neither on perception of materiality, nor on the sphere of infinite space, the sphere of infinite consciousness, the sphere of nothingness, the sphere of neither perception or non-perception, this world, the next world, nor on what is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought after, or explored by the mind, and yet one is absorbed. And to this one, absorbed in this way, all the gods pay homage even from afar. Homage to you, they say, you of whom we don't even know what it is that you are absorbed dependent on. So it's something so beyond, and these are these gods are gods with very, very refined subtle perception. It's gone even beyond that. The point I want to make though is the Buddha's talking about it in sort of positive language. It's a something that we can perceive in a way. Other times he talks about it, so it's as if it's an object that the mind can know, the mind knows this object as if in that language. Other times he talks about it as if it's a subject, as if it's consciousness released. And there was that analogy I talked about yesterday of the sunlight not landing anywhere, it's completely released. And so in those terms, talking about it in subjective terms, if you like, he talks about what remains with the cessation of the six sense consciousnesses, smell, sight, taste, sight, smell, taste, touch, hearing, smelling. The five senses and mental consciousness, when that all stops, the cessation of the six sense consciousness and their respective objects of knowledge, smells, sights, tastes, thoughts or anything perceiving the mind, what remains is consciousness without attribute, without end, luminous all around. Here, water, earth, fire and air, materiality have no footing. Here long and short, subtle and gross, pleasant and unpleasant, all kinds of discrimination or measurement or relativisms and nama-rupa, nama-rupa is perception, attention, contact, feeling and body, awareness. All are destroyed with the cessation of consciousness, i.e. those six sense consciousnesses, here each of these is destroyed. The first phrase, their consciousness without attribute, the Pali is actually vinyanam anidasanam and actually a better translation, I think, is, nidasa is to point to something or to show something and so it's consciousness that does not point to anything, again does not land, that we were talking about yesterday. So it's a consciousness completely released from any kind of object. So there he's talking of this unfabricated as in the kind of subjective terms, as a kind of awareness beyond any kind of sense of awareness that we might have, because awareness, even if it's aware, remember the sixth genre, awareness aware of itself, here it's not even that, it's not awareness aware of itself, it's not awareness aware of nothingness, it's not neither perception or non-perception, it's gone beyond, it's totally released. So sometimes he talks about it as a kind of object, sometimes he talks about it as a kind of subject, but often he just says, he talks in negative terms, or in the western theological traditions apotheatic terms or the via negativa, you can't say this, you can't say that, nothing, no attribute you say about it will be true. And the Buddha says, where all phenomena are removed, where there's this complete fading of all phenomena, all ways of speaking are removed as well, all possibility of speaking about it is removed as well. So more often than not the Buddha talks about it in negative language, it's the cessation of this, it's the fading of that, it's the unfabricating of this, and the whole thing is pointed to apotheatically, negatively, this mystery, what is totally beyond what the mind can grapple with, or even understand in any kind of conceptual ways. So this experience, this opening, this realization is possible for us as meditators, I'm absolutely not saying it's easy, but it is totally possible. We're still left with other interesting philosophical questions though, and one teacher said, I wasn't there, I heard it secondhand, he said, well you can't go from meditative experiences to epistemology and ontology, meaning just because you've had a meditative experience, it doesn't mean that what you've experienced in your meditation is anything real, or is anything that you should trust in any way. Do you understand? Just because you've had a nice meditation experience, it doesn't prove anything about anything, you just had a nice experience, so what? Do you understand this? I'm not going to say. I think it's an important point, just because I've had a meditation experience, what does it prove about the reality of what has opened to me in my meditation? How can I be sure that that points to anything real? That I can trust epistemology, that I trust that knowledge, that it's pointing to something ontologically real. What I would respond rather is fair enough, that's true. I cannot 100% guarantee an epistemology based on meditative experience, no one can. What are you going to argue? How are you going to construct a philosophical argument that would do so? But the question I would have is, okay, but where does your epistemology come from? And how will you prove your epistemology? Whatever your epistemology, meaning what are you believing to be valid knowledge about reality? That's what epistemology means, it's connected with ontology, what is real. Are you going to say, this world of matter that everyone agrees on, that's real? You still have to prove that, and you just need to pick up a few books on physics in the 20th century, and begin asking, what do you mean by matter? And the whole question starts to kind of, or the whole assumption that matter is something real, starts to get very, very shaky indeed. So matter, we understand matter, now post the scientific revolution, we understand matter as Descartes and Newton understood it, most people on the street, let's say. But come, for example, the quantum revolution, Neil Spohr, one of the fathers of quantum physics, he said, everything we call real, everything we think of as real, is made from things we cannot call real. This is what quantum physics seems to have shown us. So if you say, if I ask this person who says, you cannot go from meditation experience to epistemology and ontology, claims about reality, I would just say, well, what is your epistemology? And if they say something like, I believe in the reality of matter, say, what do you mean by matter? And have you really gone into whether that's real or not in the way that you think? Or is your epistemology, is your idea of what is real and what's trustable as knowledge, is it just socially agreed upon views? Well, it seems like most people in my society agree on this view, therefore, it must be right. Because our society is very smart, and we make all the right choices, right? You guys haven't read the news recently, has it? Or is it just the most common view that I choose as my idea of what's just what most people believe? Or if it's Descartes again, you know, that was a long time ago, and philosophy has, Western philosophy has really moved on. There's like quite sophisticated, profound critiques of Descartes, this idea of there's mind and there's matter, whatever. So I wouldn't disagree with this person who says, you can't just automatically unquestionably jump from a wonderful meditation experience that you've really enjoyed to claims of ontology and epistemology. But I would just turn it around and say, okay, well, where where is yours coming from? What are we going to do? And some people say, all that talk about epistemology, ontology, which I've talked a lot about in recent years, and we don't do that anymore. That's quite a popular view in modern philosophy as well, modern Western philosophy with the post metaphysical, we don't do metaphysics kind of thing. Actually, it's impossible. It's impossible to live in the world and be in the world without some view, some belief about what is real and what is not real, and what kind, what constitutes valid knowledge or valid judgment about that. It's impossible to be a person and function in the world and make choices, even walk from here to tea time or go to the toilet without some ontological, epistemological view going on. Well, nowhere near any kind of philosophy or whatever. So there's always some epistemology, some epistemological position view, etc. It's unavoidable and similarly with ontology with claims about reality. That's really, really interesting. Okay. So it's, it's a very complicated area. And we cannot, I think, if you really, really care about all this stuff, you cannot get away from such questions. So someone who says to you, we can't just glibly jump from your meditation experience to claims about reality, or this thing that you've opened to is real. They're in the same boat about whatever they believe. They're just glibly jump and it's easier for them because they're not questioning or not even realizing what they're assuming or it hasn't been brought into question. But there are profound, difficult questions here about epistemology and ontology. What is the reality status of this unfabricated that we might open to a meditation? Okay. What is the reality status of all this? I'm mentioning that I'm not going to dwell on it now. I've talked about it a lot elsewhere. Question though, meditative question. How, how does this most wonderful of wonderful openings open? How, as meditators, the Buddha says it's a fruit of Nossis, Nossis, G-N-O-S-I-S, which means it is a fruit of deep insight. In other words, it comes about only through deep insight. We're not just talking about the state of samadhi or concentration. So you can get to the eighth jhana. So just, just by concentrating. I start with my nostrils, whatever, if I'm doing that method, I just concentrate, concentrate, concentrate. The first jhana opens, I let that mature, let the mango ripen. The second jhana, third, fourth, fifth, all the way to the eighth. I haven't done any insight at all. I could have, as we said, the more I get into it, there's more insight ways of looking that open up these jhanas. But for this one, the unfabricated, I cannot get there without insight. It's not just a natural state of concentration that will open. It's not, it's not just a samadhi that will naturally ripen. And again, this is all in seeing that freeze and explaining what kinds of insights and how we, how we go about that. We're going to give a very brief, brief sort of tour of a few possibilities and take them from the Buddha instead of what I've said in seeing it freeze. So, so here he is talking, actually it's Ananda, actually the first, the first example is from Ananda. And he says, there is the case where a monk enters and remains in the first jhana. He notices that this first jhana is fabricated and willed, is fabricated and willed. It has intention in it. He discerns whatever is fabricated and willed is inconstant and subject to cessation. Staying right there, he reaches the ending of the affluence. The ending of the affluence is just another word for complete awakening, complete enlightenment, ending of greed, hatred and over, hatred and delusion. Or if not then, through passion and delight for this very phenomenon of insight. In other words, one is kind of clinging to one's insight. And from the total ending of the first five fetters, in other words, the experience, the letting go of, through seeing that it's fabricated, the first jhana, takes this person to the second highest level of awakening. But they're still clinging to the insight and that's keeping them from full awakening. So they're a non-returner and therefore he is due to be reborn in the pure abodes, there to be totally unbound, totally to reach nirvana. Never again to return from that world. And then he repeats it and under repeats it with the same, with the second jhana, with all the way up to the realm of nothingness and also with states of deep brahma-vahara, metta, karuna, mudita and upeka. So these states, these very stable states, are used as objects of for insight ways of looking. And here particularly, it's fabricated, it's fabricated with the implication therefore it's dukkha, it's unsatisfactory. And because one is regarding that way, there is the, in that moment, there's the reducing of clinging and because there's reducing of clinging, there is less fabrication. Yes, there is value judgment in that moment. In other words, it's fabricated, it's unsatisfactory. There's a kind of dismissing, neti, neti, if you know from the other Indian traditions. I'm not wanting what's fabricated, well this is all the subtext, the subtext of fabricated fabric. I'm not wanting what's fabricated, I'm looking for the unfabricated, I want what's unfabricated and therefore not dukkha. You understand? This is all implicit in the way of looking. So here it emphasizes what is fabricated as impermanent. The Buddha talks about three kinds of dukkha. There's dukkha-dukkha, which means just what's painful. It's dukkha because it hurts, this backache. There's anicha-dukkha, which is it's dukkha because it's impermanent. So even this happiness, even this joy, even this love is unsatisfactory, it's dukkha because it's impermanent. You understand? Can't fully forever satisfy me. The third one is something like sankara-dukkha, sankhata-dukkha. It's dukkha because it's fabricated. Now that means more than to say it's impermanent. Because of everything we've been taught is fabricated, it's something that doesn't have inherent existence and therefore it's kind of in some way or viewed from a certain perspective, it's dukkha. Okay, so this is one method. You take a jhanic state up to the realm of nothingness or you take a nice stable brahma-viharic state, metta or whatever, and you view it as fabricated in the moment, again and again, fabricated and therefore unsatisfactory. And because of that there's less clinging and because there's less clinging there's less fabricating and see where it goes. And the instruction here from Ananda and if you really develop this practice can go deep, deep, deep, deep, deep, maybe all the way. Okay, second example and let's find that. So the Buddha says, I tell you the ending of the effluent, again the ending of greed, aversion and delusion, meaning total awakening, the ending of the effluent depends on the first jhana. I tell you, total awakening depends on the first jhana. And then he gives an analogy which is probably a little bit confusing so I'm going to leave that and just read what he says technically. There is the case, let's just do that, there is the case where a monk enters and remains in the first jhana and he describes the first jhana, Piti and Sukkha, born of withdrawal, withdrawal from the hindrances, accompanied by Vitaka and Vichara. He regards, the monk regards, whatever phenomena that are connected with form, feeling, perceptions, fabrications and consciousness, in other words the five aggregates, form, Vedana, perceptions, fabrications and consciousness, he regards them as inconstant, stressful, a disease, a cancer, an arrow, painful, an affliction, alien, a disintegration, a void, not self. Okay, so here's the jhana and now one is looking at the elements that make up the jhana or some of the elements, actually he's looking particularly at the jhana factors here, right, we said there are five factors in the first jhana, following this, and one's looking at them, insight way of looking, in the moment and looking at them in these ways. Now all that list of adjectives there, they are inconstant, stressful, a disease, a cancer, an arrow, etc. We can actually put them into four baskets, okay, there's a lot of repetition there basically, we can put them into the baskets of the three characteristics and one of emptiness, voidness. So the three characteristics are dukkha, which is unsatisfactory, it is as I said a disease, a cancer, an arrow, painful, an affliction, stressful, etc. All that, that they're just similar words for saying is dukkha, yeah it's unsatisfactory, yeah, so it's the first characteristic, are you following this? Yeah, the second basket is the second characteristic, impermanent, and here we have words like inconstant, a disintegration, etc. So it's the second characteristic, the second characteristic as an insight way of looking, yes. I'm looking at the jhana factors right here in the jhana, so I have to have enough sensitivity, enough malleability, enough attunement of mind to be able to know the jhana really well and then kind of look at the individual jhana factors with these insight ways of looking, if this makes sense. Third basket is the third characteristic, what's known as the third characteristic, and that's that it's not self, so when he says it's not self and also when he says it's alien, it's not self, it's not me, not mine, none of this, the piti is not me and mine, the sukha is not me not mine, the ekagata, the concentration, all the rest of it is not me not mine. We're looking at it with the insight way of looking of anatta, it's anatta, it's anatta again and again, yeah. The fourth basket is avoid, not avoid but avoid, two words, yeah thank you, two words, avoid. So I think this points to they're not just not me not mine, they're not just anatta but they have no phenomenal self, they are empty of having a phenomenal self, the piti doesn't exist inherently, the ekagata, the whatever, it's void, it's empty of inherent existence, void and empty interchangeable words. Okay and that's an interesting word, sunya is the Pali and sometimes people occasionally say to me oh well the only place the Buddha really talks about emptiness in the Pali canon is two suttas with emptiness in the title, but actually there's all kinds of teachings about emptiness of phenomenal self, not just it's anatta not me not mine, emptiness of the personal self, there's all kinds of teachings that's emptiness of phenomenal self in the Pali canon and different ways the Buddha uses the word empty and so here's one, they're a void, they're an emptiness. So there's four ways of looking there, the three characteristics, unsatisfactory, dukkha, impermanent, anicca, not me not mine, anatta and void or empty, sunya, sunya and Pali. The jhanas form a really good because they're stable objects, partly what it means, jhana partly can be the etymology, I think I said traced to a candle that burns steadily, so because of the steadiness of a jhana, remember it's our two s's in the middle of sasi, because of the steadiness they actually form really good objects on which to practice these insight ways of looking. Also because they're clear, the chitta in a jhana is clear and subtle and malleable, it's an optimum, optimum, what do they say, location, location, location. They're really good spaces, places to practice this but all this stuff we're talking about is after you've really mastered and become familiar with jhana, then you need to get practice that your insight ways of looking. So all this we're talking about, it's a long, long process of development of practice but incredibly beautiful and incredibly freeing and gratifying but takes time to develop all this. So earlier in the retreat we said why is it such a great place to do this? Yes a stable object, yes a clear and subtle chitta but already in the jhanic state there is a little less fabricating, we've almost defined the whole jhanic spectrum that way and that means the self is less fabricated at that point and what do selves do? They go me mine, me mine, me mine, me mine, me mine, they appropriate, right? So that the habit of me mining is already a little bit less so it becomes easier than usual in that space to just see things as not me not mine, yes? So the anatta practice is easier, it's easier to let go because of the well-being and especially if you're confident that you can get this jhana back, it's not just oh my god I had this amazing experience once and I just need to cling onto it because once you've gone in and out a lot you don't get attached to jhanas anymore, you know? I used to say it's like in this country, thank goodness for us, that I'm not going to get super attached to water. I mean there's water there but I actually don't know how old that is but if I want water I know I can go to the tap, it's just there. When I don't know that there's a tap there that I can turn on and off then my relationship with water gets very you know attached and difficult and understandably so but once in and out of the jhanas we can actually let go quite a lot in the jhanas because it's a well-being that it becomes much where we're less attached to, we're more used to, we trust it can come and go and it's easier to let go there. And also as I said impermanence becomes obvious so that's also one of the reasons why they're prime spaces. Here it says, who is this talking? This is the Buddha and he's talking about it so I tell you the ending of the efforts depends on the first jhana and then he goes right through all the other jhanas up to the nothingness okay and but I would say probably it will get easier with the third jhana just because there's much more stillness there and what we're talking about at this level is really something that takes quite a lot of stillness and spaciousness and kind of subtlety and if there's too much sort of PT bouncing off the walls and kind of making things turbulent this kind of thing can get a little more difficult. But theoretically I think it's possible it's probably much easier from the third jhana onwards but not past the realm of nothingness because in the neither perception or non-perception it's you need to actually perceive things here, you need to perceive what the jhana factors are, you need to be able to almost make clear things and in the neither perception or non-perception that's partly what defines the state is almost like I'm not quite perceiving anything. Again I've said that only a Buddha can do this in the realm of neither perception or non-perception not an arahant not anyone else. So he goes through the same thing with all the jhanas and again he says um well actually I've missed a bit out so he regards whatever phenomena that are connected with the aggregates there. Sorry I've made a mistake this one is is concerned with the aggregates not with the jhana factors so the five aggregates that are present in the jhana factors body feelings perceptions mental formations fabrications and consciousness and he regards them in one of these four ways dukka nitya nata or sunya and does that and then he turns his mind away from those phenomena because there's a letting go and having done so incline inclines his mind to the property of deathlessness the amara what is deathless is unfabricated this is peace this is exquisite the resolution of all fab the ending of all fabrication the relinquishment of all the paraphernalia of being the ending of craving dispassion cessation unbinding or nirvana and again it says um it's staying right there you know staying right there and he reaches the total liberation or if he's a bit if he she they are a bit attached to their insight there which is after all quite an extraordinary level of insight um if they're a bit attached to it then they get only as far as the non-returner and they're according to this reborn only in the pure abodes the heavenly realms the highest heavenly realms and in those realms they will come to full awakening there to be totally unbound never again to return from that world so first jhana up through nothingness and then he says thus as far as the perception attainments go that is as far as nosses penetration goes in other words that's what i said before you can only do this kind of insight way of looking on up to the realm of nothingness because from there you're not really perceiving anything to get hand enough of a handle on it yeah the aggregates okay third third third uh passage are we are you okay with this yeah here the buddha is talking about sari puta one of his chief disciples and says monks sari puta is pandita which can get translated as wise it can also get translated as skilled he's pandita he's wise or skilled he is uh the translator here has of great discernment it's actually mahapanyo of great um you could say wisdom you could say discernment you could say insight you could also say and what i'd like to put the emphasis on because that's what the passage is talking about is um sari puta has great um skill in insight ways of looking and you see that's exactly what the passage is talking about monk sari puta is wise and skilled of great insight of deep insight of wide insight of joyous rapid quick penetrating insight note the joyous yes joyous this insight way of looking approach as i said yesterday it's a joyous way of practicing insight there's there's no way it can't be i mean maybe a little bit here and there but basically because you're looking because you're relating in a way that unbinds right then you feel that the taste you feel it in your body in the consciousness of some degree of unbinding some degree of release from suffering and therefore it is joyous beautiful spaces open up so why is he all that because there is the case where sari puta enters and remains in the first jhana whatever qualities there are in the first jhana and then he lists again the jhana factors the five jhana factors which we've had and then he lists things like contact feeling perception intention consciousness desire desire um persistent mindfulness equanimity attention the list could go on a little bit he ferrets them out one by one known to him they arise known to him they remain known to him they subside he discerns so this is how these qualities not having been come into play come into being ewan this is how such such is the way they do remember remember we had this brief discussion i think and you asked about this the um satipatthana sutta and how it can so easily be read and heard and translated as a teaching on impermanence missing this how so this is how these qualities not having been come into being and how having been they they vanish um he he remains unattracted and unrepelled with regard to these qualities independent attached released with an awareness rid of barriers he understands there is a further escape there's a further nisaranam and pursuing it he confirms that there is and that further escape is the second jhana and then he goes through the same thing all the way up to the realm of nothingness here's a jhana what can i what makes up this jhana so sometimes when we're practicing jhana we we for the most part want to not differentiate not deconstruct it want to see it as one homogeneous yumminess and i just throwing myself into that vat of homogeneous chocolate yumminess yes that's how we want to relate to it i don't want to be deconstructing it seeing its gaps and impermanence i don't want to be deconstructing in terms of its constituent elements unless i'm doing that so i can work on one of them like my um i have to switch the analogy now like my like my wattle and door building has got a bit of a hole in it and i need to sort of focus on that bit and and kind of push it back or bring a you understand i'm not i'm not deconstructing it unless it's if i've got a samadhi intention unless it's for the sake of shoring it up for the samadhi but now we're in an insight way of looking we are really interested in in the in the discerning in the in the seeing what's going on here what are the elements here and bringing into play an insight way of looking which changes my relationship with those elements very very powerfully very potently all this is extremely subtle but it's absolutely doable with practice so i put so much emphasis on this sensitivity attunement etc take taken to extraordinary levels but absolutely possible and if i can do that then the whole thing begins to unfabricate unfabricate in this example he's going um stage by stage through the jhanas i think i said the other day what might happen is a bit like an elevator shaft sometimes the elevator will just go and you're just at a floor or in the area of a certain floor somehow somewhere i'm around the seventh jhan whatever it is sometimes it goes all the way but here there's a kind of stage by stage he's stopping at every floor so this word void we've already explained that you know what there's many ways of understanding emptiness as we said in response to the note on the question on the note earlier so we can understand if i'm looking at a jhana factor or something like attention or even the intention to pay attention or something like um vedana or something like um consciousness there's many ways to understand its its voidness its emptiness so in other words there's many possible subtext if i'm using that way of looking empty empty one of them though could be fabricated which one might have already understood i see that when i when i practice letting go this fades therefore it's fabricated therefore it's empty of inherent existence but but the key thing is here as we said it's the how how something arises how these elements arise and not just the jhana itself but the actual elements how is it that consciousness arises how is it that consciousness fades how is it that a sense of contact or a perception which remember means experience or appearance or phenomenon how is it that it arises and how does it fade so that's a very very you know this is the deepest level of dependent arising as a dependent arising is a teaching you can take on many different levels at a certain level it begins to deconstruct which is why i could say at the beginning what dependently arises does not actually arise at the deepest level of understanding dependent arising what dependently arises does not arise but there's a whole range of levels at the deepest level where it kind of still just about makes sense to talk about arising let's see if i can explain this very briefly it's again it's in it's insane that free is in quite careful detail but it's a very deep meditative state we don't even need to put a jhana name on it just somewhere in that territory where there's a lot of fading no sense of my story no sense of my personality and all my neuroses and my whole the big complex me there's just the simplest possible self what might be the simplest possible self yeah just just a sense of consciousness just a sense of consciousness no story no personality just a conscious an awareness just subject in the in the barest most basic sense everything's faded that's all that's left and with that all that's left is let's say a very very simple object now it could be the realm of nothingness it could be something in that territory some very very empty state in terms of object or what's being fabricated there as an object subject at its most basic level we might say object at its most basic level we might say and there's a third element that goes with these that always goes with these no subject no object no object no subject but they need a third element to stand together to construct something time time what time doesn't mean oh yes i remember when my um or what i'm going to do after the retreat completely beyond all that it means just a sense of the present moment just a sense of a present moment now implicit in a sense of a present moment i would say implicit without any thinking without any is is a subtle sense of a future moment and a past moment it goes with our sense of time so this is the most basic tripod three legs propping each other up they need each other take away any one of generally speaking there's always exceptions but generally speaking take away any one of these legs and the other two come tumbling down the other two get unfabricated so this is the most basic perception this is way down there at the at the at the low end of unfabricating here's this thing about conception and intention so i would say this bare barest subject this most subtle subject most unconstructed subject with a extremely unconstructed object and the barest sense of time it still has pregnant within it conception and intention there is the sense subject recognizes as something other than it and subject self by sankara karmically is invested my big story none of that there's an investment this subject this this thinnest subject is invested in some way or another with this object i like it i want more of it this is not linguistic i like it i want more of it i want it to stay around i want it to increase i want it to decrease i want it to go away i want to keep it just as it is there's an intention on the subject's part in relation to the object do you understand it's what subjects do it this is this is karma this is sankara this is the the wheel of samsara at the at the most basic basic level there's a conception of time not thinking about time and there's a conception of an object i'm not thinking about an object or a subject but it's woven into the very perception there's a there's a conception of subject object in time and woven into that there's an intention some intention or other to do with what happens in time some investment on the subject's part to do with the object about how it what what then happens in the next moment so implicit in a sense of a present moment the barer sense of time is implicit a sense of a next moment and there's investment in what will happen in the next moment for this subject so there's already clinging there it's wrapped up in the most subtle intention and the most subtle conception this is this this most basic tripod this is propping up samsara and the concept so we say these uh come back to the these three arise together they go back to the the question on the note they dependently co-arise it's not like first there is a subject sort of sitting around you know what's this called when you drumming your fingers waiting waiting for an object and waiting for time or that there is time waiting for which is also quite interesting and if you know something about very recent developments in physics but um they arise together here we're even saying they arise together we're really at the edge of what language and conception can arise arising is something that happens in time and now we're talking about the arising of time they arise together they go together there's language exactly at this point this is the limit i would say this is the limit of conventional language in terms of in terms of how deep we can go with understanding the arising and passing of things and dependent arising they arise together they are not separate subject object time they're not three things but nor are they one thing and nor are they nothing no things and nor are they many things and nor are they infinite things really i mean they're not really you could see them in all those ways but really they're not any of those so typical avijja typical ignorance delusion has this believes in this conception there is a subject there are objects and there is time that's the basic that basic conception is avijja out of that basic conception comes inevitably this intent these intentions in some way or another for the next moment in regard to this object or i want a better object or whatever it is not not talking about any thinking at all it's so so subtle that's basic avijja propelling samsara propelling the wheel of dependent origination at the most basic level in the conception in this most basic conception is the avijja out of that most basic concept not even out of it but wrapped up with it is this stream of sankara intention that's another intention as what fabricates i'm invested i'm clinging i'm pushing i'm pulling in the most most subtle ways when we understand what's happening here understand they're not three understand they're not one understand it's not nothing when we understand how this arises through through this conception and through the intention and the clinging at the moment we understand that or rather let's put it this way when i am meditating and i bring that understanding and i use it as an insight way of looking i take this this is what's going on here there's a conception of subject object time and it propels it it's wrapped up with or wrapped up with it is this movement of intention of clinging very very subtle when i understand that at the and i plug that in as a way of looking i understand what's going on therefore these things are fabricated these subject object time are not are not fabricated they're not unfabricated time is a fabrication they're not and i understand how they how they arise together then we could say okay at that moment avijja is much much much less in that moment of employing that insight way of looking this makes sense avijja the the foundation or if you were the first link of dependent arising we've just decreased it radically at that point and so we're not pumping in to the wheel of dependent arising we're not pumping the liquid into samsara samsara means to flow sara to flow into that flow we're not pumping the liquid in because the the the avijja squeezy liquid box thingy has got no liquid in it or very very little liquid in it does this make sense and then our tripod collapses unfabricating total unfabrication no time no subject no object no present moment no awareness in the usual sense of what we what we mean by awareness or in any big vastness of awareness or something like that so as i said that we're talking about something very very subtle but actually very very subtle but actually very very doable if i approach it in the right way thus he trains himself and that's probably probably takes a while but it's really really possible so the buddha said um like i paraphrasing he probably said it much uh more elegantly but something like um no matter how long your legs are and how long you walk for uh you'll never reach the end of the world no matter how long even if you lived forever you'd never reach the end of the world but without reaching the end of the world you won't know liberation without reaching the end of the world you won't know liberation so he's talking about this the end of the world the other places he defines the world as basically the six senses what appears in the six senses including the mind so you could say philosophically speaking all this has relevance as what we might call a phenomenological approach a radical phenomenological approach in philosophical language and yet it's still the case that a person might take might might go through all this um business and open to the unfabricated as an experience and yet not take it or decide not to take it as implying anything at all with regard to the world it only implies something about the mind's relationship with the world and the world of experience so that then they maybe conclude that i experience the unfabricated and therefore there's no rebirth because i've severed my infatuation and my ties and my clinging with the world there's no rebirth in the world and and from that kind of understanding we do get a very or it's that's it's possible to get a very dualistic there's the unfabricated and there's the world and not not much more is understood about the world from that viewpoint so one could view it that way one could also hear all this and i think sometimes people do or partially or partially read read about it and view it as a kind of what we call in philosophy mentalism in other words all this world is just there is no materiality it's all materiality is an illusion and what's real is the mind and the mind projects this world but we're going beyond that i mean there's lots of critiques i could have that partial understanding it's the mind awareness consciousness and all the elements of the mind that make up the mind too they are empty too one can come to see that they are empty too all of them all the world and the mind and the elements of the mind all this they're like sari puta gives a analogy of two i think sheaves of corn or wheat or something you know like in a field after the farmers do their harvesting they might prop two sheaves of wheat uh leaning on each other the whole thing mind and world aware this the elements of the mind they will prop up prop each other that's also partly what means dependent co-erasing like that like the like the tripod they're not really separate things they're empty of being really separate things but they're not one thing some people um this what i've described here in very briefly um um kind of rushing through what i've described here uh is uh not only um beautiful as a practice but um it profoundly liberating for the for their life i say maybe let's say most people we go back to the epistemology question i'm still left with well how do i know i can trust this what this means but for this is i'm not going into the epistemology thing right now but for some people it's convincing enough that's totally convincing and that does it for them there there will be people who don't like this approach um for different reasons or just would find when they hear about it they just don't find it convincing um this whole idea of less fabricating and exploring that imitative journey of less fabricating so there are other approaches to emptiness uh that are possible and again written about them in seeing the freeze they're what i call analytical meditations or what are called analytical meditations very different from this business about insight ways of looking at fabrication but we can through these analytical meditations you can come to understand it's impossible for something to have inherent existence it's just another way into emptiness okay so going back to something i said at the beginning if a person again says as a fabrication whether i they use that word whether i use that word or not fabrication what we mean by it is is an important concept fabrication is important concept for example um uh seeing papancia as fabrication and then uh you know i see umara seeing seeing its fabrication letting go of it and then um you know that one's with the unfabricated so papancia in the common sense of the word there's there's actually when the buddha uses it he means something much more subtle i think but anyway we'll we'll keep it at that so fabrication is an important concept because we see for example the difference between the papancia mind and the mindful mind or the mind of bare attention so fabrication is an important concept but i'm not really interested in all this mystical deep talk of the unfabricated etc or or yeah but that's all irrelevant to life uh what's that got to do with life this kind of thing or it's only for some people that that thing fabrication is important as a concept for everyone but this business about unfabricated it's only for some people i would say are we not then making an artificial distinction or drawing an artificial an arbitrary line between everyday life and the mystical because again i said at the beginning why why have i why have you why has a person drawn the line about what is fabricated where they have drawn it why there first of all where exactly have you drawn it and why there do you understand the question the principle of fabrication as i said um the principle of fabrication the principle of clinging the principle of the relationship between clinging and fading it's the same and it's one spectrum and as i said my mom can understand there's papancia i have to explain to her a bit what clinging means at that gross level and she'll say oh yeah when i just calm down a bit and relax a little bit then it all it all fades but this is the same principle there was the fabrication then i let go the clinging and the fabrication the papancia faded it's the same principle is one spectrum all the way from that to what we've been talking about this evening it's one spectrum there's one principle actually a really really simple principle running all the way through it's only perhaps that preconceived unquestioned ontological assumptions assumptions of views about beliefs about what is real are somehow dragged in to what's actually one spectrum one what's actually a coherent system and then these preconceived assumptions about reality just make a division in that spectrum and i end up dividing the spectrum and actually making it a bit incoherent you understand okay last thing again someone might say well and we talked about this yesterday a little bit with the realm realm of neither perception or non-perception so someone might say well what's this totally transcendent unfabricated got to do with me what's it got to do with life what's it got to do with my life it's so transcendent so removed you know life is contact life is experiences remember that's what perceptions mean life is the senses and what comes to us in the senses life is emotions it's heart it's story itself and even if it's not self it's at least the flow of aggregates right that's life what's this got to do with life what's it got to do with me why should i be interested in this already in the fourth jhana we talked about the quietening of emotions and that's the part of life so we're in the in the in the jhanas we're getting used to this unfabricating again it's one way of understanding what's going it's probably the most helpful way of understanding what's going on in the jhanas they're not a hundredth time on this retreat they're not states of deeper concentration and ability to keep your mind unwavering on one object etc etc so already in the fourth jhana there's a quietening of what we might view as life and there's hopefully a kind of opening to the beauty of this which is sort of halfway um or a lot less like life than we think than we're used to thinking so what's it got to do with me and again um we talked about this before you know it may be that a dualistic understanding and a dualistic sense of the world and the sense of things comes out of all this there is the unfabricated this um wondrous mystical release and opening and something that is completely beyond conception completely beyond perception there is the unfabricated and there's the world of the fabricated and they're really different they have no connection and this is clearly better than that and i don't want to be reborn i just want to whatever the word is dissolve unbind nirvana means unbind is one of the etymologies vana like a vine like a wrap things in vines nirvana i just want to unbind in that not be reborn so it could lead to kind of dualistic understanding absolutely could doesn't have to sometimes what happens for a person opens to this kind of experience and then it's as if that unfabricated then can be at least at times um a sense of it shining through the world of experience the world of matter the world of phenomenal reality the light of the unfabricated shines through the song of the unfabricated blows through um it casts a light on this world it casts its light on this world or it is the light behind and through the phenomenal world or it gives a kind of space and context to this world and the comings and goings and the ups and downs of this world so that's much less dualistic right have to be careful though because remember we talked about the after effects of perception on perception and by now it should be clear there are many possible many possibilities for what could be perceived as shining through it could be the joy of the second jhana as some people have reported very beautifully that can shine through or that can shine through or the third jhana or the the realm of this or that yeah um so there is this possibility i think of a sense of the unfabricated shining through but but we have to be careful in our discernment is it the unfabricated or is it something something else but a third possibility is again what i've touched on before and i think we talked about it yesterday again it's like through all this i go further i go further than the unfabricated i don't stop there wondrous as that is and i go further in my understanding of emptiness and dependent arising and i realize through that that i sense through that in my being in the fibers of my being in my consciousness i sense through that this again we run out of language whatever the words might be for something for participation so profound that it's beyond the word participation for an intimacy and an involvement so uh intimate and involved and close and deep that it's beyond what we usually mean by words like intimacy and involvement um participation intimacy involvement in in the mystery of things in the mystery and the magic of appearances and then there's sacredness everywhere there's holiness everywhere there's this beauty of emptiness everywhere without any duality okay so people take this different ways and but there are possibilities here different possibilities okay let's have some quiet together

 Okay, so yesterday we talked about the seventh jhana, what we might call the seventh jhana, what many people nowadays call the seventh jhana, and what the Buddha simply called the realm of nothingness. And there's the possibility of going beyond that too, to a deeper jhana, a more refined jhana. So we not very optimistically turn to the Buddha. So again this situation he's describing a monk practicing, gone through these jhanas, up to the realm of nothingness, the dimension, the sphere of nothingness, sticks with that theme, develops it, pursues it, establishes himself firmly in it, and then after a while the thought occurs to him. What if I, with the complete transcending of the sphere of nothingness, were to enter and remain in the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception? Without jumping at the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception, he enters and remains in the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception. He sticks with that theme, develops it, pursues it, and establishes himself firmly in it. That's it. Neither perception nor non-perception. What is this about? We should be very clear. It's not, again, what's primary here? There's something primary that the title, the name of this realm and jhana captures. Neither perception nor non-perception. I've come across writings and herd things that seem to emphasize or make most significant with regard to this jhana the absence of thinking or just how delicate a state it is in that any little thought will decimate the state, will knock you out of it as if that fact is the most significant thing, how easily a thought will disturb it. The title is telling us, the name is telling us something. So much here, certainly with regards to this jhana, so much in relation to all the jhanas, and I would say, and maybe you hopefully are getting an inkling by now, that so much in the whole of the dharma and the whole way we understand dharma and approach and what we think we're doing with it and what is primary in it, so much hinges on what we mean by perception, what we mean by that word perception and how we understand it and how we relate to it. What does passanyas in Pali, Samjhana in Sanskrit, what does it mean? What does it not mean? What does it not mean? Yeah, but yeah, certainly as well. But what I want to say right now is to perceive doesn't mean to label. Remember that? Do you remember this? Well, I think I said sari was a pomegranate or something. So oftentimes you'll come across that in the list of what all these Buddhist words mean, samya is a labeling or a remembering. I don't, or I'll put it this way, we could interpret it that way, but what then unfolds in terms of the whole scaffolding and conceptual framework of the dharma will be much, much more limited. So perception is not a labeling, it's not a verbal labeling of things. That would also imply that the sheep out there don't perceive, don't think sheep have length. They're not a language, but they certainly know the difference between food, a human being and a sheep. So they're perceiving without labeling, I would assume. So we're talking about something else here, an insect, maybe even an amoeba in some ways differentiates between what's to eat, what's to, I don't know, do amoebas have sex? What do I do with this? What do I do with that? Which way to go? That way or that way? Without one assumes labeling or language. So what is perceiving? What is perception? I'd say it's probably most helpful, most congruous with a whole conceptual framework and scaffolding understanding of dharma that will be most helpful and most liberating if we think of what perception as meaning something like the forming or constituting or fabricating of an object for consciousness. Do you understand what I mean by that? I think it will be most helpful and most liberating and most congruent with a really liberating and far-reaching conceptual framework of the dharma. If we define this very basic term, perception, as something like the forming or the constituting or the fabricating of an object for consciousness. This is so, so important. Do we understand just that? So we do that when there's no, if you're really telling me that you notice as you walk from here to the dining room, everything you notice there's a verbal label going on. Sarah's shaking her head. There isn't. You're still perceiving. Someone has called it recognition as if it's based on memory. That's another interpreter, recognize an object. We can always perceive an object that I don't recognize what that object is. I don't recognize it or just that it's some kind of object. All this is perceiving. So we could say perceiving is the act of forming, constituting, fabricating an object for consciousness and perception, as we defined earlier in the tree, we're using that word synonymously with experience, other words, experience, phenomenon, appearance, object even. Object, experience, appearance and phenomenon. Phenomenon is just a Greek derived word, phenomenon or something in Greek means appearance. So I would use those words interchangeably. Someone to talk about the object, the experience, the phenomenon, the appearance, perceiving the act of constituting, forming, fabricating that object for consciousness. So when we say playing with perception, we're playing with both. We're playing with forming and the fabricating and the constituting and of course that does form and fabricate and constitute a different object or a changed object, an altered object, a more or less fabricated object for perception. Sometimes it's interesting, it's like what's a difference in terms of defining terms makes? Defining terms in this way or that way can make them for the whole possibility of what the Dharma can be. Something to really reflect on and if you're really keen, you could actually trace it, have two different definitions of perception. For example, perception understood as mental labeling and perception understood in the way we've just talked about and see what kind of Dharma is possible from both. That would be a really, really good exercise if you're up for it. Based on that, the whole interpretation of the Dharma opens or goes in one direction the other or closes or gets limited. Other terms take on certain meanings which end up being very significant, very liberating or not particularly. Anyway, so everything to me hinges certainly in this Jhana because it's just in the name of the Jhana neither perception or non-perception. Certainly in Jhana work in general and even more significantly in the whole of the Dharma. In the realm of nothingness, the Jhana before this one that we're talking about today, the primary perception and actually the only perception left so to speak because we've kind of all the other perceptions of PT and Sukkur and space and all, they've gone. The only perception left is this strange perception of nothingness. The only perception left is nothingness and that's a perception. As we said, we tried to imagine that, we're not talking about a very, very big space with nothing in it which is what most human beings would think of when they say, can you imagine nothingness? We're talking about something even beyond that is nothingness. That's the only perception left and that's the primary perception in the realm of nothingness. That's strange enough and now we're going to go even beyond that. Neither perception nor non-perception, we're not even perceiving nothingness because nothingness and nothing is a kind of object is constituted in the realm of nothingness is constituted. Nothingness is constituted as a kind of object for consciousness, for attention, for the chitter. You understand? It's some kind of a very strange thing that's a nothing. It's a thing there. It's a nothing. Here in the realm of neither perception or non-perception, without being unconscious, in other words, without being totally non-percipient, so without being unconscious, the chitter, the consciousness is, we could say, not landing on any object at all. It's not, well, we could almost say that. It's not landing on any object, not even the strange object of nothingness. It's not landing. When there's a nothingness, or will it say, easier, when there's whatever jhana you're up to and is your playground, it forms an object. The primary nimitta forms an object for consciousness and the consciousness wants to really get into it and enjoy it and yummy it. It's a kind of, do you understand? There's the subject and the object. The object is the primary nimitta or the jhana itself and that's an object for consciousness. You could use the language, the consciousness is landing on that object. That's partly what attention means. Here it's not landing on any object, not even the strange object of nothingness. It's not landing in that way moment after moment. That's what makes it the jhana, the constant burning. This sense of not landing on any object is the primary nimitta. In other words, in some strange way, the state itself, the sense, the fact of neither really perceiving, which means, again, neither really construing, constructing, fabricating, forming an object, nor not perceiving at all, that state, that fact, the sense of that, the sense of the mind kind of, would we say, doing that or not doing that anyway, somewhere in between. That's the primary nimitta. You could say a secondary nimitta is the sense of liberation with that. When the mind doesn't land on something, it's not like when you throw a hook and the hook lands in something, it's just not hooked by anything. It's unhooked. Not completely, I'll come back to that. It's not completely unhooked. But that sense of not landing, not being that there's a kind of liberation in that, that unhooked, if I use the word unhooked, you can feel the relative liberation in that. A hook is a kind of tether, a fetter, an imprisonment. Perhaps we could say the sense of liberation with that sense of freedom that comes with that is a secondary nimitta. Who's old enough here to remember the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy? For those that you don't know, it was a series of books. I think I must have been a young teenager when it came out. I was very funny, sort of, what would you call it? Funny sci-fi, I guess. Funny science fiction. I think this was from Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. It could be from somewhere else. There was instructions on how to fly. Do you remember this? It was a two-step instruction. The first step was fling yourself at the ground. The second step was miss. In a way, that's what's going on in this genre. That's not really going to... Well, later on it might help you as an instruction, but probably at first it won't. What the ground translates as here, if we take the Hitchhiker's instructions, the galaxy instructions, what the ground translates as is anything and nothing. Anything and nothing will constitute a ground that you're going to potentially... That you want to miss. You understand? Now, there is a sutta in the Samyutta Nikaya where the Buddha gives an analogy. I think he's talking to Ananda. He's giving the analogy of consciousness being liberated, liberated, unhooked, completely unhooked. The analogy he gives is sunlight rising in the east and coming into... Well, what starts off as a house in the analogy and then... Anyway. He says to Ananda, the sun rises in the east. Where will the sunlight, which is consciousness, an analogy for... Where will the sunlight land? Ananda says, well, on the western wall. The Buddha says, well, what if there isn't a western wall? What if there isn't an object for it to land on? Ananda says, well, it will... I think he says something like, it will fall on the ground outside there. He said, okay, what if there isn't a ground outside? Then Ananda says, well, it will fall on the water, which I guess is the water under the ground in some kind of cosmological system. He says, what if there is no water? Ananda says, well, then it wouldn't land. He said, just so, that's consciousness liberated. Now, actually there, the Buddha's talking about the unfabricated, which is a stage ahead of even this Jhana. But the analogy works very closely. We're almost there in this Jhana. There's something almost, but not quite analogous to the Buddha's analogy of nirvana, of the unfabricated, of what remains beyond cessation. Or we could put it, we could language it. It's not landing on anything. We could say, we're not fabricating, there is not the fabrication at that time of any perceptions or all other perceptions have been unfabricated, except two perceptions. One is the very state, this sense of not landing, this sense of not quite perceiving, and yet not quite not perceiving. That's sort of a perception. It's a sort of remnant of it, or just on the edge. The very perception of not really perceiving, but not really not perceiving. So that's one perception. The other perception that remains is time. Now I'm telling you this, but it may or may not occur to a meditator in this state that that's still there as a perception. There's a sense of this not landing happening in time. It happens in this moment and implicit in this moment. Even I'm so, so in this moment, there's still implicitly and experientially a past moment and a future moment. So this not landing in this state is ongoing in time. That's a very secondary perception. Probably most people wouldn't even notice it as a perception unless you compare it with a totally timeless sense, which comes later. So I'm kind of telling you that now. There's two perceptions we could say remaining there. No perception of anything, not even nothing, nothing would be a kind of something. No perception of anything except the state, this strange not landing, this strange not really perceiving, not really not perceiving. And secondarily that that is happening in time. And it's this latter aspect as well that's actually both of them, but the latter aspect happening in time that I would say is a fundamental difference between this eighth jhana and a state of cessation or complete unfabricating. Actually they're both significant, but I want to point to that. So in this state, in this jhana, there's a sense of something, another way we could just phrase it is a sense of something so, so ultra refined, so, so ultra refined. It's really on the edge of perception. And that's one way of sort of seeing what's happening. It's neither, it's something so ultra refined, we can almost barely say it's a thing to be perceived. It's an object, a phenomenon, an experience, an appearance. It's so ultra refined. There's almost nothing left of a perception as we construed it earlier. And as we said, secondarily, there's a sense of release, of being released from perceptions. Arjun Li, I mentioned him some point earlier in the retreat. He was the teacher of the teacher of one of my teachers, a Thai monk in the 20th century, early 20th century. And he kind of phrases it, the chitta, the mind, the heart are kind of in this state, they're struck, it's struck by its inability, the chitta is struck by its inability to decide if it's a perception or not. It's absolutely right, but to me it just, maybe it's a translation, it just sounds all very clunky, like one sort of, hmm, I don't know. And it's sort of pondering like that. Something extremely, really subtle is going on. But it's really, it does capture something of it. So again, we can think of this business ultra refined, and we can connect that, as we have so far on the retreat, with the whole spectrum of refinement, which I talked about, that's kind of a very fruitful way to understand what's happening through the eight jhanas. They're really a spectrum of more and more refinement, which is just the same thing as saying it's a spectrum of progressive removal of what is gross, right? Because that's just what refined means, to refine some things. Which is just the same thing as saying it's a progressive non-fabricating, a progressive unfabricating, because we would expect the grosser thing to be what's most fabricated. Don't fabricate that, it gets removed, the thing's more refined. And then the next gross thing, don't fabricate that, gets yet more, that gets removed, gets yet more refined, you understand? So if we think in detail, let's just see. So the first jhana is a refinement, what's been removed at the first jhana? The hindrances, yeah. We could say the grossness of the hindrances, they're gross, they're gross phenomena. The grossness in the first jhana, the grossness of the hindrances is removed. There's that kind of refinement. We could just say, to say the same thing, the hindrances are not being fabricated. In the second jhana, we could say there's a removal of thought, and we had this problem with Vitakka and Bichara and how you're going to translate those terms. Certainly discursive thought. That grossness is removed, it's not being fabricated. In the third jhana, what is removed, what is not being fabricated? Piti is not being fabricated. Piti is removed. Relatively subtle compared to the hindrances, compared to the gross body sense, but actually now the most gross thing there. It's then not being fabricated. In the fourth jhana, sorry, in the third, where are we, yeah, third jhana, fourth jhana, even the subtle, even the sukkha is not being fabricated, right? So that's being removed. That's the gross thing being removed, but actually that's something very, very subtle at that point. In the fifth jhana, even a subtle sense of materiality. Remember, we talked about these three levels of being. There's gross materiality, the kamaloka world. There's the world of subtle materiality, the world of the rupajanas, the subtle form, what's called in Buddhist cosmology. But even the subtle form is removed. Even subtle materiality is not being fabricated. Even that relative grossness, which is actually very subtle, is being removed in the fifth jhana. We can keep going, et cetera, et cetera. In the seventh jhana, space is not being fabricated. In the eighth jhana, not even nothingness is being fabricated. So you see how this refinement, removal of the gross, not fabricating something all goes together. And then what happens after this jhana? Now we're not even fabricating nothingness. Now we've gone beyond that. Is there some further non-fabricating that's possible? Which hopefully we'll get to. So this refinement is really a sort of very remarkable feature of this jhana, very remarkable. And in practice it can help you to find or notice or tune to focus on, if you like, the most refined perception. So again, you could do this in the state itself before it's quite consolidated and come together. Just tune to the most refined there. Keep tuning to the most refined. That will help consolidate it. We could say perception, but it's not even quite a perception. The most refined thing, object, that doesn't really do it. The most refined sense, the most refined level. I don't know. Words really start to fall apart at this level. It gets really hard to put things into language. But the tuning to whatever is most refined there can help consolidate it if it's not already consolidated in a session. So we can kind of refine the whole experience and move it into the more pure realm of neither perception or non-perception by very gently, very gently looking for, very delicately looking for, listening for, attuning to, putting our antennae out for whatever is most refined. That's a very subtle, sensitive, delicate, and gentle process. One can even perhaps start doing that in the realm of nothingness. When that's established, when you've got some experience with that, then maybe kind of looking for what's the most refined in there, ultra-refined. Again, it may start, what do we say, maturing, purifying from that, moving on from that, from that, attending to the most refined level, and that amplifies it, as we've talked about, all the way through the retreat. So that's, with experience, that may work that way and may take you to the realm of neither perception or non-perception. So I was trying to find the suttur and I, well, anyway, I couldn't find it, but again, this is an escape. It's an escape, nisaranam. It's a release of awareness. Again, he uses this language a lot. It's almost a total release from perception, almost a complete not being hooked, not casting out a hook and finding an object, almost a total release from perception while there is still awareness. So we're not talking about general anesthesia or anything like that here. What I was looking for and couldn't find is there's some languaging. So remember we talked about, the Buddha talks about the jhanas as perception attainment. Do you remember this? I couldn't remember if then he says the highest perception attainment is the realm of nothingness. In other words, this one, because it's neither perception or non-perception, actually doesn't qualify as a perception attainment. I couldn't remember if or if he counts this one as the highest perception attainment. It doesn't really matter. The principle is the same. I do think somewhere or other he calls this one, neither perception or non-perception, he calls it the summit of perception or the limit of perception, I think. But then we can go beyond this and hopefully we'll get to that tomorrow. We can even go beyond this, this much I'm fabricating, this limit of perception, this summit, this perception attainment, if that's what it's called. There is, again, with the sense of refinement there and somewhat akin to the fourth jhana and some of the other jhanas, there's a real sense of purity here. There's something in the very refinement itself and the stillness, extremely pure. Again, these words don't quite capture. The experience itself is so different than normal experience that words which we use for normal experience get quite clumsy at this point. But I think that's quite a good word. There's something very pure about it. It feels very pure. Refinement, purity, release, these are all part of the texture, let's say, of this realm. And there is something, I think, and then these words start to sound really ridiculous, amazing and jaw-dropping. It is amazing and kind of jaw-dropping, but the whole thing is at this point very, very delicate, very, because of the refinement, it's very, very still that it's almost like one is awestruck with very little reverberation going on in the being because that would disturb things. So if one can have one's jaw-dropping without much reverberation, one would. But in the refinement, in the purity, in the release, there is something really amazing there, I think, exquisite, beautiful. But these words don't really capture it. It's very different, as I said, from normal experience. We're really talking about something quite different. And in some ways, I think, in a lot of ways, at least that's my sense, in some ways it's quite different even than other jhanic experience. There's a kind of larger quantum leap here, I think. The after effects on perception, one of them could be that with regards to what's going on in the inner and the outer worlds, how my mind is, how my body is, what I see out here, what I sense out here, there can be just a sense in the after effect of perception. It's just what's happening in the realm of perception, all this. All this stuff, my mind is foggy, my mind is clear, I've got a pain in my tummy, I've got a headache, there's this perception, that perception. It's just appearances, it's just what's happening in the realm of perception, which is very different than this is what's happening. It's just what's happening in the realm of perception. So in that way, do you understand what I mean by that? In that way, there is this kind of even deeper relativizing of our phenomenal experience, internal, external. With that, through this relativizing comes this really effortless equanimity with regard to the things of this world, the eight worldly conditions, praise, blame, pain, pleasure, headache, no headache, whatever it is. This equanimity comes partly from that after effect on perception, it's just what's happening in the realm of perception. It relativizes it. Or these are just perceptions, they're just perceptions, whatever I'm perceiving, my tummy ache, my headache, my foggy, foggy mind, this or that in the world. They're just perceptions. It's not that things are really otherwise, like I have a foggy mind but really my mind is clear or really it's this or that other, but they're just perceptions. It's not that another perception is true instead. So how do we open the door here? How does the door open for us? One way and perhaps the safest and best way perhaps is just letting it naturally mature from hanging out as fully as one can, as wholeheartedly, as attentively, as absorbently as one can in the realm of nothingness. In time, it will mature. So that's one way. I think sassy probably has to become assey at this point because suffusion really pertains to the energy body experience. Maybe there's a way we can talk about different kinds of suffusion, but in a way, the others are more important, absorbing into the nothingness, sustaining the attention, sustaining the sense of nothingness, the intensity which is not so important, and the enjoyment which is very, very subtle. So the assey rather than sassy perhaps, working with that, getting into it, hanging out over and over and over, and at some point, it should mature. Second possibility for getting there is again from that same sutta, the Anandasapaya sutta where the Buddha is describing insight ways of looking that lead to the immaterial realms, the immaterial dimensions. Basically he's gone through his ones that we talked about yesterday with regard to opening up the dimension of nothingness. Now he says, then again, the disciple of the noble ones, again, there's that word considers, employs, engages subtly an insight way of looking thus. All sensuality, all sensual perceptions, all perceptions of forms which includes the perception of jhanic forms and jhanic experiences, perceptions of the fifth and sixth jhana, in other words, perceptions of infinite space, perceptions of consciousness, and the perception of the dimension of nothingness, all are perceptions. All of that are perceptions where they cease without remainder, that is peaceful, that is exquisite, i.e. the dimension of neither perception or nonperception. Practicing or frequently abiding in this way, his mind acquires confidence in that dimension. In other words, it's just the same thing, perceptions are not peaceful, and it's just the same thing as the instruction for the realm of nothingness that we talked about yesterday, have just included the perception of nothingness, have just extended it to include the perception of nothingness. Again, very, very powerful. If you can get the hang of these kinds of insight ways of looking, very, very powerful. I don't need to repeat, we're talking about something very agile here and an actual, not a whole big thinking thing, not a whole big philosophy, it's a very light tincture in the way of looking that one's employing again and again. By way of looking means way of relating, way of sensing. Now, one could do that, this perceptions are not peaceful, I want something peaceful. All those perceptions are not peaceful, I want this, what is exquisite, what is peaceful, the realm of neither perception or nonperception. One could do that in and from the realm of nothingness. One could start doing that in the realm of nothingness, start employing this insight way of looking, or actually you can do it from anywhere, you could do it from right now, just whatever is in front of me, foggy mind, et cetera. And again, contradict myself, say so much, oh, this, you know, Jhana will depend on the one before it and that will depend on the maturing of the one before it, et cetera, et cetera. After you've got a hang of all this, sometimes there will be plenty of times when you sit down and body feels funny, mind feels blah, blah, blah, and you just start on that very discomfort of body and non-settledness of mind and non-clarity of mind and you just start employing an insight way of looking like that and lo and behold you end up in the eighth Jhana. So it's not, it's all in the art, in the trust, in the confidence, primarily in the art. Also in the familiarity, that's much more likely to happen if you have some familiarity beforehand with the neither perception or non-perception. But you know, it's definitely not going to hurt to try such a thing, okay? I think it's too locked on where it might end up. It's still practicing a very powerful insight way of looking and see what happens. It will be, as we will return to, it's going to be connected with the whole spectrum and the whole process of unfabricating. So whether I actually end up in the eighth Jhana is again less significant than what I learn through employing insight ways of looking and seeing what they do and understanding what they do and adding two and two together and getting four, right? That's much more important than whether I have achieved eighth Jhana and I get my eighth Jhana badge. Jhana. It could also arise or it can also be helped by a similar reflection, just a perception, just a perception, which again was very similar, was exactly what we listed, included in the list we gave out yesterday. It's just a perception. And again, that could be in and from the realm of nothingness. This too is just a perception, this perception of nothingness. And just a perception there means again, fabricated, right? Just a perception means it's fabricated. That's the small print for just a perception. Or again, you can do that from anywhere. Again, I start with my feeling body and not feeling so good and the mind is just a perception. Whatever comes into consciousness, whatever perception there is, just a perception, just a perception meaning it's fabricated, it's fabricated, it's just a perception. And that will start, if I'm doing it right, if I've got the art right of that insight way of looking, it will unfabricate. Because all this is related on the spectrum of unfabrication, it may open up the realm of neither perception or non-perception. So I could do that from the realm of nothingness or actually from anywhere, from a very ordinary state of consciousness, even from the midst of the hindrances. There are also plenty of other ways of looking that one could kind of adopt or train on the object of the realm of nothingness. But I've talked about them elsewhere, I'm not going to mention them. The slight risk in those last three I've listed, so either the perceptions are not peaceful, perceptions are not peaceful, that one, or just a perception, that one, or other insight ways of looking, is that they might, they could be sometimes so powerful that they even overshoot the eighth jhana and you get even more unfabricated. That's possible. So there's those four, then there's, remember I said I think it was very near the beginning of the retreat and talked about the jhanas end up being, the sense we can have is just that they're there already, they're in the air, they're frequencies, they're radio frequencies, and we can just tune our dial and find that frequency. So similarly with this, neither perception or non-perception, it's kind of like a radio frequency or radio station. When we have a memory of it, in other words when we've gone in and out lots of times and really gotten more familiar with it, we can just, from memory, just tune to that frequency again. And of course that's very related to just the whole mastery thing and it opening the door, or the door to this realm opening through subtle intention, very similar. Someone told me a little while ago that their way of working was in the realm of nothing, their way of moving from the realm of nothingness to the realm of neither perception or non-perception was in the realm of nothingness to just introduce a little very subtle sort of thought or intention really. Might there be perception without this object of nothingness? And it was just a kind of invitation. Might there be a kind of perception without this nothingness as an object? And that that would help open it up for them. It might be also that some people are kind of able to find or then tune to and open to, I don't know what to call it, a level of the mind or a part of the mind, part of the citta, that already right now or so it seems is not perceiving but not non-perceiving. It's already neither perceiving nor non-perceiving. Sometimes that's possible and then it's possible to find the now in it, make that very alive, present, now, now, now, the sense of that happening now and refine it in that way. So there's a part or a concean, there's a part or level of the mind that is even now not engaging in perception, is free of it or is not interested in perceptions. It wants to be free of perceptions perhaps. And again, unhooking from perception or perhaps it's already unhooked. There's a very subtle sort of hidden dimension but finding that and then that can be amplified perhaps for some people that will work. And again, that's something that could work from any state of consciousness, from a normal state of consciousness. The grosser the state of consciousness, the more turbulent it is, the harder that will be to do. So, you know, sometimes you get surprised with these things. You get very, very surprised at what's possible. So these last three that I've mentioned, either tuning to it from memory or the subtle intention or this kind of very subtle question, is it possible to perceive right now without this nothingness, without this object of nothingness, that one, or this kind of finding a level of the mind that's already kind of neither perceiving nor non-perceiving. All of them imply and need, I would say, some confidence that there is this possibility of neither perception or non-perception. And the confidence helps these methods to work so that we can kind of fish for it. And we have confidence in our fishing. And by fishing, I mean an ultra-sensitive, subtle receptivity and attunement. And through that, it can emerge. So again, though, there's an issue here, you know, with some of these methods. So if I have an employed insight, way of looking, perceptions are not peaceful. They're not peaceful. I want what's peaceful. Let me, let me, that's not peaceful. Any perception is not peaceful. If I employ that method, if I employ this tuning to a part of the mind that's actually not engaging in perception or interested in perception, and maybe some of the other methods, is there the possibility of aversion? Is there the possibility of aversion to perception, which means aversion to experience, appearance, objects? Yeah. Yes, there is. So what we're talking about here, again, so important to emphasize in these insight way of lookings, if there's aversion mixed in with it, it sends the whole thing in a very different direction. It stirs things up in a very different way. So what we're talking about is an insight way of looking that doesn't have aversion in it. So aversion needs to not be there. So the Buddha talks about, when he talks about insight on several occasions and the way some streams of practice mature, when he talks about the way some streams of practice mature, he uses the word disenchantment and that the practitioner becomes disenchanted with everything actually, with the whole world of phenomenal experience in that outer. There's a disenchantment with sense objects, disenchantment with mental objects, disenchantment eventually with the jhanas, disenchantment eventually with the formless jhanas, all that. So that word occurs relatively frequently. Some maps of the way insight progresses or the stages of insight really emphasize this quite a lot and emphasize that a practitioner practicing very deeply goes through a period or even recurrent periods of extreme disgust and repulsion at everything, the whole world of appearances in outer states, mental objects, physical objects, the whole is disgusting and repulsive to them. And there's a lot of agitation often with that. It may be that someone experiencing that sort of thing, it may just be that aversion and neurosis have gotten tied up in their practice. And one is deciding to view it as being on the edge of awakening and etc. But actually it's just aversion. I'm aversive to my body. It's not great insight into dharma or something, it's just there's aversion there. Well, there's a kind of neurosis. Sometimes there's a lot of encouragement for very high energy, high intensity, high intenteness in practice with a kind of micro sharp focus, all these things, intensity, energy, micro focus building up with this teaching about disenchantment given primary place. Actually aversion gets mixed up in there and the whole thing just spawns cycles of dukkha that may have very, very little to do with liberating insight. But one might have heard that they have to do with liberating insight and so one just goes round and round in that. Are they liberating? Is it liberating? Or are they dependent arising? If I look a certain way, I get, there's a whole thing about playing with perception. If I look a certain way, I get a certain result. If there's aversion in my looking, I get a certain result. If there's neurosis and repulsion, I'm going to get a certain result, a result in my perception, in my sense of things. Do you understand? In some circles, this is a really, really important thing to consider. Have to understand dependent arising, the dependent arising of perception. And if my whole mode of working in insight is not taking the inquiry into the dependent arising of perception, it's not taking that as central. I've just got an idea I'm going to laser beam through this and whatever I hit is closer to the bottom layer of rock and that's the truth and eventually I'll reach that truth or reality. And I'm not inquiring into dependent arising. Do you understand what I mean by this? This is, to me, this is the most important thing. If I'm not thinking that way, I go back to what I said at the beginning, what's the conceptual framework and is the conceptual framework set up to really liberate or is it set up to take me in directions where I don't understand fully what is happening and what my experience is and why this experience arises now and why that experience arises another time and why this experience arises or doesn't arise. We can certainly set up and people do a whole process of insight and stages of insight and there's very, very little consideration of dependent arising. It's almost like it's just a thing on the side. To me then, there isn't. Dependent arising and emptiness are almost synonymous, almost synonymous practically until the very last levels, they're synonymous. If I'm not inquiring into it, I wouldn't, if I'm not including that as kind of the central theme and scaffolding of my meditative inquiry, then it's possible that whatever insights I have have very little to do with emptiness as I would understand it anyway. So, there is, I think, I remember coming across it once and I can't remember where it is, there is a sutra in the Pali Canon, I think in the Pali Canon, where two old monks are talking and it's not the Buddha, I can't remember who it is, two old monks are talking and they do describe a process of these stages of insight that go and they go through something like disgust, etc. There's no place I'm aware of where the Buddha describes that but it may well be one of the things, again, that's very, very emphasized in certain texts like the Visuddhi Maga or the Abhidhama. And then that gets like, this one instance of these two old monks talking becomes, in some paradigms, in some models, this is the way insight unfolds. These are the stages of insight as opposed to, this is what will happen if you look this way, this is what will happen if you conceive this way and if you look this way. And if you conceive another way and look at this is what will unfold, etc. So, the stages of insights, a possible model of stages of insight, if I look a certain way, usually prioritizing impermanence and micro focus, etc. So, I'm mentioning this because I know some of you have run into this and some of you probably have no idea what I'm talking about, it may or may not be useful at some point. It is true somewhere rather the Buddha says, basically there are four ways to liberation. You can choose the path that is pleasant, it's a pleasant path and it's long. Or you can choose a path that's pleasant and short, or you can choose a path that's unpleasant and short, or you could choose a path that's unpleasant and long. I actually think what I'm trying to say now actually goes beyond that because to me if it doesn't include this inquiry into the dependent arising of my experience now, dependent on my way of looking, if that's not in my inquiry, the question would remain, I'm not saying it's impossible, the question would still remain for me, does that path open up a full understanding and a really deep understanding of dependent arising and emptiness? That would be a question I would have. I would say most definitely that insight and practice and the path can be mostly fun. I would absolutely definitely say that, mostly delightful, mostly characterized by a sense of release and relief and some degree of liberation now as I'm practicing. I would say that. As part of what I mean, can we bring some intelligence to this? Can we bring some intelligence to these very basic questions or intelligence to how am I practicing? It's really, really fundamental. We talked very briefly about what's the definition of insight. Well, we can define insight in all kinds of ways, all kind of people do if you listen even just to enough terevarden based on it. There's lots of definitions of what insight is. One way and the primary way I find helpful, well actually I would like to keep a few ways open but one of the ways I would particularly like to emphasize is insight means ways of looking that reduce clinging which means increase letting go in the future for the future but also now, right now and even primarily now. That's what insight is. It's adopting ways of looking that liberate and that primarily liberate right now. That means all these insight ways of looking that we're talking about, we'll give examples of and there's loads more we could talk about. They should feel liberating. They should feel like there's a relief and release, a delight, a beauty, an opening, a peace, joy that comes with them. If they're not, then they can still be insightful, they're not the kind of insight that I would like to emphasize, put it that way. If we define it that way, then actually the whole and we kind of use that as let's say the primary understanding of what we're doing, then the whole path just it does not need to be this whole contracted thing of sitting through pain and all this eruptions of difficulty. Do you understand? Again, some of these themes carry over from these different genres. In a way there with that insight way of looking that Buddha gave here, perceptions are not peaceful. They want what's peaceful. That is peaceful, the realm of need of perception and non-perception. Other times the Buddha says I couldn't find the whole quote, but it's a very common almost stock formula. Perceptions are dukkha. Perceptions are a hassle. He doesn't say quite that word, but perceptions are a boil. You know what a boil is? Like a big painful pimple, big zip. A boil, a dart, an arrow, a cancer, a disease and then he goes on. This is what perception is. It's extreme language or even when we just say perceptions are not peaceful. Again, there's the danger of that tipping us towards, leaning us towards a dualistic conception, a dualistic philosophy, but also a dualistic sense more than just an abstract intellectual philosophy, a dualistic sense or a dualistic lived preference even away from this world. The world is perception. The world is perception. What else is the world if it's not perception? Phenomenologically speaking. Appearance, experience, objects, phenomena. The world is perception. If I start to say perceptions are a boil, a dart, a cancer, a dukkha, it's basically saying the world is. We might get again here a tipping, a dualistic preference and tipping away from the world and in preference for this subtler realm free of perception. In the idea or the way of looking, perceptions are fabricated. They're empty too. Sorry, perceptions are fabricated. They're empty. That also will, if we don't fully understand what we're doing there and what it means fully to say that something is fabricated, there's a danger too of dualism there. Fabrication is an interesting word because in English, I don't know how it is in English, it's in other languages, but in English a fabrication is also a lie. We say is a fabrication, I don't know, is it the same in other languages? Yes, in some languages. The word fabrication is very interesting. It connotes an untruth. I use it partly because it connotes that. It's just that if we really take it deeply, we go beyond that notion of untruth. We take it, but we hold it provisionally and we go even beyond it. It has a derogatory connotation, fabricated, fabricated, fabricated. There is this derogatory connotation. If I'm adopting an insight way of looking and saying it's just a perception, it's fabricated, it has got this slightly dismissive, it's a lie, it's not true. Do you understand? But I need to understand more deeply. I need to understand dependent arising and emptiness more deeply through not just intellectual but through the lived meditative exploration. I really need to feel this, see this, sense this, watch it work in action and feel its effect. When I do this, this happens and it feels like this and the intimate experience of that. If I take that far enough, it goes beyond, I would take, definitely goes beyond any notion of duality or hierarchy there. The whole understanding, when I explore it that way, the whole understanding of what it means to say something is empty or a fabrication, it's not dualistic. It's almost the opposite end from dualism. We could say we get a sense of being so profoundly intimate with the world of experience. That's not even comes close as language. The world intimacy doesn't come close. Something even more intimate than the word intimacy can possibly connote. We participate in the co-fabrication of the universe, of the cosmos, of the world, of things, of life. But even that doesn't quite do it because we have a certain notion of what the word participation means. We participate in the magic of the dance and the co-arising of subject and object. We participate in a way that's, again, there's no word for the depth. Participate intimate. They come sort of close, but it's even deeper. Language is based on notions of subject and object. When they start falling apart or collapsing into each other, not into some oneness, they're neither one nor two subject and object, nor nothing, nor many things. They're not zero, one, two, nor many. Language is based on there's this and that as a subject and an object. The whole language of intimacy participation, language cannot cope at this deep level. If we say the profound sense of participation in the magic of the co-arising of subject and object, the magic of the co-arising of the appearances and awareness, the appearances of appearances and awareness, of self and the world, the magic of that, the beauty of that, somehow we're completely implicated, interwoven with that in the most gorgeous and blessed ways. This is very far from dualism. If one goes deep enough into this, again, just into this same investigation into fabrication and dependent arising, I don't lose sight of that. If I just, hopefully we'll get to this tomorrow, if I just a little bit investigate fabrication, a little bit investigate dependent arising, I'm not going to get this gorgeous full blossoming of all this. And again, similar themes, it should be, it should be the case with this realm of neither perception or non-perception, and it should certainly be the case that the more we understand and the more we open to the emptiness of the world, it should be the case. And I would say it is the case that if our conceptual framework doesn't get in the way, remember, how much depends on that. You can have all these wonderful, wonderful experiences or frightening experiences or amazing experiences, just strange experiences. But if I'm not taking care with my conceptual framework, my big picture, my understanding of what I'm doing and what's going on, those experiences can deliver very, very little or actually deliver what is really not helpful. So even more than the experience, the understanding and the understanding of the conceptual framework, it should be that experiences at this level of this genre and deep emptiness, etc., that the emptiness of the world, one sees that, but they actually somehow open up even further, increase our love for the world, our love and compassion for the world. It should work like that. The heart opening in that way, sensing things in that way, touched in that way becomes tender, open at a whole other level, is wonderstruck, touched with a, I would say, a sense of the profound blessing of the magic of appearances. Profound blessing of that whatever the word is that's more than participation. It's the profound blessing at the mystery of things, the mystery of appearances. I think let's stop there, actually. Let's maybe sit together for a bit. Okay.......

 Okie doke. So, seventh genre, which the Buddha didn't call it that, as far as I'm aware, it has the appealing name of the realm of nothingness, the dimension of nothingness. So, let's again start by checking out what the Buddha says, which is, ok, he's gone, this monk or whatever has gone through the first six genres, and then the thought occurs to him. What if I, with the complete transcending of the sphere, the realm, the base, the dimension, of the infinitude of consciousness, recognizing there is nothing, what if I were to enter and remain in the sphere of nothingness? Without jumping at the sphere of nothingness, he enters and remains in the sphere of nothingness. He sticks with that theme, develops it, pursues it, and establishes himself firmly in it. Let's just sit quietly for a moment. But believe me, it gets worse. Trying to put language to these, it gets worse. So, ok. Some people, this is, again, I have no idea about statistics, but it's certainly not unheard of. For a person, even a beginner, on their first insight meditation retreat, maybe they just went for some, they heard it was good for stress reduction and relaxation, and somehow, following simple instructions, etc., they're sitting there one day in meditation, minding their own business, and a huge, big, black space opens up, and they feel like they kind of fall into it, a void or the void, and they might have heard the language of the void, and it's got charged, or it refers to certain, actually refers to different things in different Buddhist traditions over the years and other traditions, the void. So, this is, yeah, some proportion of people have that experience. Something like that happens, but usually when that happens, out of the blue, so to speak like that, and without much preparation, without much orientation, there's usually not really a discerning which, if any, if any, of the four Arupa Jhanas, the four Arupa, the immaterial realms, dimensions, one has found oneself encountering. So, the person will speak, everything disappeared, there was nothing there, but actually I've heard people say that in relation to the first Jhana. Just, there's something, it becomes very hard, it's so, these states, including the first Jhana, are so different from people's usual experience, understandably, that one struggles not only to put into language and describe to the teacher, if you have an interview, or whoever it is, or a friend, what's happened, but also to actually discern what has happened. As the Buddha said, what's present now, and what is absent? So, someone just says, everything disappeared. Well, actually there's still a lot of stuff in the first Jhana, there's still PT, Sukhya, and all the rest of it. Here, in the realm of nothingness, there's a lot less, but usually without training, the eyes are not used to the dark, so to speak. So, there isn't this discernment, what is still there, what is not. So, if you ask such a person who's fallen into, stumbled into encountering something like a void, a big black space, ask them, is there, was there a sense of space there? They may not have had that much discernment. Was there a sense of space, or was there not a sense of space? So, usually, if someone says, if I say to you, imagine nothing, maybe not for you guys at this point, you should say to someone, imagine just nothingness. Probably a person would try and imagine a big black empty space with nothing in it, probably, but that's not the realm of nothingness. That's probably more akin to the realm of infinite space. At any rate, this novice meditator or meditator without any kind of map or orientation or understanding what has just happened, this big dark space with nothing in it, without much discrimination, because they're not trained and they're not prepared to discriminate the subtleties of differences in all these states. Most would say, oh, it's a nothingness. But actually, because also of the non-discrimination, the non-preparation to be able to discriminate and discern, there won't be the blossoming, there won't be the full blossoming of whatever sort of potential state there is there. It's the discriminating, it's the discerning that allows something to blossom. We're back to this noticing, attuning, amplifying. Amplifying means blossoming. If I don't notice a difference, if I don't attune to it, and if I don't notice and attune to it, then it doesn't get amplified. In other words, it doesn't blossom. So whatever state this is that oftentimes actually scares the living daylights out of a person, if they're a novice meditator, if such a thing happens, it's probably not really any of the foremost giants. It's a sort of in that territory, potentially could be any of them. But because there's not the discrimination, because there isn't the preparation and the skill and the subtlety of and sensitivity of awareness to discriminate, because of all that, it actually doesn't really become any one of them, probably. More significantly, the person almost certainly does not understand how that happened at that point. I was just meditating, I was just noticing things, letting go, and then this thing happened. Almost certainly have no idea how it happened or why it happened. They may or may not get much explanation from books or whoever's teaching the retreat or talks or whatever. No understanding how it happened or why it happened. So it just seems a random occurrence. Again, it might be presented as a kind of random occurrence. What's the important thing? Two things, you'll be okay and it's impermanent, both of which are true, but there's no real understanding of the why there. The why has to do with dependent origination, dependent arising or dependent fading. So it probably doesn't fully blossom, probably there's very little or no understanding of how or why that has opened or kind of emerged. As I mentioned, there's probably or often would be quite frightening and such an experience. One just feels like one's on the edge of an abyss or has fallen into an abyss. There will be fear with such an opening, such a deep bottoming out of experience, such a deep disappearance of the world of phenomenal reality, the conventional and accustomed world of phenomenal reality. There will be fear usually if there aren't a kind of series of stepping stones to such an experience, a series of stepping stones that one has enjoyed and learned to trust and delighted in and they've become stable bases, stable stepping stones. And what are they? Well, the other six jhanas. So these other six jhanas up to the seventh jhana, because we learn to really trust them, they're also droppings out. They're also disappearances of, to some degree, they're unfading, unfabrications, unfabricating to some degree, do you understand? But we've got used to that. Not only have we got used to it, we've learned that they can become stable and that they're delightful and we trust them. There's nothing to be feared here. Without those stepping stones and the training and time that it takes to really establish those stepping stones, then just being presented with this edge of an abyss or falling into an abyss is going to be frightening. It's a long way from normal consciousness to such an abyss. It's a much less of a way from the realm of infinite consciousness, sixth jhana to the seventh jhana. It's just a step. And so there's much, much, much less likelihood for there to be fear. And then that fear can cause mayhem in all kinds of ways. So what's going on here, and the Buddha doesn't help that much, does he there? It's not that there, so we were in the infinite consciousness and it's not then with this next step that it's not that consciousness is not there in the realm of nothingness, but the sense of space has gone. This is why I say, if I say to you, can you imagine, can you imagine a big black space with nothing in it? Yeah, most would have some sense of that. Okay. But we're saying that's not actually the realm of nothingness. Can you imagine nothingness, not even space? A little trickier. Okay. So this has really kind of gone beyond our, quite beyond our usual sense of things. Space has gone. It's not that consciousness has gone. Consciousness is there, but consciousness is not prominent in the way it was in the sixth jhana, in the realm of infinite consciousness, when the consciousness and the consciousness knowing itself or even knowing the infinite space was the primary nimitta. There's still consciousness. There has to be consciousness there in the realm of nothingness. Otherwise we wouldn't have any sense of anything, any perception of anything, any consciousness of anything, but the consciousness is not prominent. It's rather that the chitta, the mind, the heart is struck, captivated, drawn to the sense of nothingness, the sense of nothingness, which doesn't even have a sense of space with it. Or might have the last vestiges of space, but as you get deeper into it, even the space kind of, I don't know what the word is, collapses or gets sucked into itself like a kind of black hole or something like that. And that nothingness is the primary nimitta. That's what the mind is drawn to, captivated by, struck by, entranced by, etc. The conscious is still there, but it's not the primary thing. Later on, and I hope we will get to go into this or describe it on this retreat, later we have to re-find and re-focus on the consciousness as one aspect or thread of being able to go even deeper. So at the moment it just kind of, we forget about the aspect of consciousness. Later we have to find it again as just one thread of a path that can take us beyond even this nothingness. Experientially, usually, such a state, the realm of nothingness is basically pitch black. And as I said, we've gone beyond anything that could be described as space with nothing in it, which would be more akin to the infinite space. Sometimes, without the sense of space, it can sometimes feel as if it almost has a thick texture to it, because the space sort of thins things out and then there's no space. It almost feels thick. But I think, and this is where we get very hard language, but that probably passes, and it's not that thickness is not that we've then taken a step backwards in terms of refinement. This is definitely a refinement over the last realm of infinite consciousness. There's nothing left as a perception, nothing left as a perception, but the perception of nothing. There's nothing left but nothing. There's nothing left but nothingness. And that's the one thing that's striking one, is something, again, very breathtaking. It may be, for some, even someone who's not a beginner like the person we described just innocently sitting on an insight meditation retreat, having never heard about any of this stuff. It may still be, for some people, an acquired taste for some people. But I would say, at some point, either immediately or gradually or eventually, at some point, it will turn and one will fall in love with it, fall in love with this mystical nothing, this mystical void, this mystical nothingness. So how do we get there? How does it open up? Well, again, one possibility is just letting the realm of infinite consciousness, letting that mature, just really getting to know that, sit in that, love it, open to it, get to know it inside out, stay in it, stay in it, dissolve as much as one can, etc. And naturally, at some point, there will be an evolution and it will sort of take a quantum leap, a quantum jump into a different dimension, the dimension of nothingness. As always, eventually with time and the intention to develop mastery, there's the possibility of accessing the realm of nothingness just through a subtle intention through the memory of it. And that takes a lot of practice, as with all the jhanas, just getting familiar, but it's just as possible. But here, and I want to dwell on this, is where the insight ways of looking as a way in to this realm get really interesting and really important, really, really significant. So in this other sutta that we've already mentioned, the anenja sapaya sutta, the way to the imperturbable or the conducive to the imperturbable sometimes translated. So here is a sutta where the bulk of it is the Buddha is talking about insight ways of looking to predominantly the formless realms. There's other stuff in it too. So he's talked about up to the sixth jhana and he gives the name the imperturbable to the fourth, fifth, and sixth jhanas. So just for this sutta, it seems to refer to those four, fifth, sixth. And then he says, so he's gone up to that point. And then he says, then again, the disciple of the noble ones considers this, I would say, this consider again, it's not, it's not, I don't know what a better word in English would be. It's not an intellectual pondering. It's, it's a one employs a way of looking. And that's a very light, very agile, very subtle, and very potent. A heavy pondering, philosophical, is not going to produce any meditative state and open any doors to other dimensions. Okay, so we don't really have a word in English, but the way I would definitely translate is the disciple, the disciple of the note of the noble ones employs a way of looking, which involves a very subtle text that says something like and understands something like all sensuality and all sensual perceptions, and all perceptions of forms, and all perceptions of the form, the form jhanas, the Rupajanas, and the realm of space, and the realm of infinite space and the realm of infinite consciousness, all that, all sense perceptions all form perceptions, all Rupajana perceptions, all perceptions of infinite space and infinite consciousness, all that. There are all perceptions, they're all just perceptions where they cease without remainder, where they end without remainder, where they no longer are, that is peaceful, that is exquisite, i.e. the dimension of nothingness. Practicing and frequently abiding in this way, her mind acquires confidence in that dimension. I'll read the others too and then we'll come back and do them individually. No, let's take them individually, it's better. So what's going on here? Basically, one's employing a way of looking. Again, we're talking about some, if you're not used to this idea of ways of looking, we're talking about something very subtle. It's an insight way of looking. It's a certain conception and relationship with, in this case, all those perceptions. So anything that comes up or that might come up, one might be in the fifth Jhana or one might be looking at a perception of material sensual perception in the world. It might be the third Jhana or a perception of a Rupa Jhana, whatever, all those perceptions and whatever perceptions will come up or have come up, they're not peaceful, they're dukkha basically. So some of you know, the first, what I call the first dukkha practice is unsatisfactory, but particularly they're not peaceful. There's a sort of confidence there that when they're let go, when these perceptions fade, when they let go, there's a dimension called the dimension of nothingness, which arises when they quieten, which arises when they're absent. Does that make sense? So this is all a very, very, all that blah, blah, blah, I just said, is all right there in a way of looking that's just happening again and again and again. Very subtle tincture in the way of looking, making the way of looking very subtle, not a whole verbose philosophy. And one's applying it to whatever one is perceiving, whatever, again and again and again, sustaining over and over and over. And those perceptions fade and in their absence, the perception of the realm of nothingness opens up. They're not peaceful, but this is peaceful, this is exquisite, the dimension of nothingness. So that's one way the Buddha describes and as one could say, yeah, they're dukkha, they're unsatisfactory, but particularly with his emphasis on them, they're not peaceful. This is peaceful. Second way, second way, second insight way of looking that opens up this realm. Then again, the Buddha says, the disciple of the noble ones, having gone into the wilderness, to the root of a tree, into an empty dwelling or into a retreat center in rural Devon, considers this again, consider, same deal, it's with the insight way of looking, very subtle, very potent. It's potency proportional to its subtlety in the mind, to its non-verbousness. There may be words there, very subtle, but it's talking about something very agile, considers this, I really don't like the word, but looks in this way. This is empty of self or of anything pertaining to self, or you could translate it, this is void of self or of anything belonging to self. Practicing and frequently abiding in this way, his mind acquires confidence in that dimension and the dimension of nothingness opens up. So when we read that originally, you think, oh yeah, that's to do with there being no self, because Buddhists talk about there being no self. I think it's actually more to do with what I call the phenomenal self, not the personal self, but the self of phenomena. This is a lamp, this is a piece of paper, this is a glass, this is a hand, et cetera. So just as we take habitual avijja, habitual delusion takes self to be something real, a real thing. We also do that with anything at all. This is a sound, this is a taste, this is a clock. Do you understand? And to me, what the deep teachings of emptiness are pointed to is not just the emptiness of the personal self, but also the emptiness of the self, selves of phenomena. Everything is empty, all things are empty of being things, of being inherently existing things. So the way of looking, this is empty of self, this is void of self or of anything pertaining to self or belonging to self. I think it's referring to that and that if you practice it that way and that this there is again is anything, anything that's in the attention, anything that one pays attention to, whether it's this body or this, whatever it is, is empty of self, empty of self, it's empty in itself. That's another way of saying it's empty in itself. If one does that again and again, again, we're talking about something very agile, it has to make sense to me what that means. It's empty, empty, it's empty of self or of being something that is a part of some larger self, like it's a part of a larger phenomena like this, spring here is a part of a larger lamp or anything like that. That has to make sense. So the insight way of looking has to make sense to me. So one way of going about is empty of self means it's fabricated in the way we've been talking about means this thing does not exist as a thing unless the mind fabricates it as a thing. And if the mind doesn't put in the conditions, clinging and conception and a certain relationship to it, that thing does not get fabricated or constructed as a thing. Does it make sense? So these ways of looking have to make sense, but it will be equivalent or one way of doing it or shorthand ways is fabricated, fabricated, but I have to have the experience of having seen things unfabricate through playing with other ways of looking in the past. I have to have enough experience of that, but when I point at something with my mind and say fabricated, it's resting on my on the consolidation of my previous insight, seeing things fade. I know they're fabricated. I know it here in my heart. So I can just say I can just look at them as fabricated. And in that one word, there's a whole you could write a book explaining what that one word means fabricated. So it has to be there. And that's what I mean. It's very agile because that one word contains a lot of understanding, but very, very in a very dense way, but very light. So fabricated maybe is empty in itself or of a phenomenal self, which is more than to say, it's not me or not mine. Okay, I would say to really point to this, John, and we need to go beyond the teachings about personal self and not me, not mine, and actually to the level of the phenomenal self, the emptiness of phenomenal self, which is a deeper level. It could also be, and some of you know this, and it's in seeing that freeze all this stuff is in seeing freeze, but it could also be say, this is empty, empty of self or of anything belonging to a self void of self or anything void or void of anything belonging to itself. Some of you know, in seeing that freeze, you can find a meditation on holes and parts and a way of going deep into emptiness or pretty deep into emptiness through a meditation on holes and parts and their relationship and their mutual dependency and mutual emptiness. And so this could be referring to something like that, whatever this is, it's not a part of something bigger and it's not a hole which has parts. Those whole, those note, the very notions are empty. So there's different ways of doing it. It's in, we don't have time to go into detail. I'm just kind of pointing at things here, but it's in seeing that freeze in quite a lot of detail. But that might be an option there. Okay, so that's the second one. Third one, then again, the disciple of the noble ones considers, or my qualifications about that word considers, then again, the disciple of the noble ones considers this. I am not anything belonging to anyone anywhere, nor is there anything belonging to me in anyone anywhere. I am not anything belonging to anyone anywhere, nor is there anything belonging to me in anyone anywhere. I am not anything belonging to anyone anywhere, nor is there anything belonging to me in anyone anywhere. It should make us scratch our heads. I think you have to consider also perhaps the time of the Buddha and the different religious views that were around and the different meditative practices were around. It is very possible, and in fact in the Buddha's biographical story there is just this, that someone takes for example the realm of infinite consciousness as the ultimate reality and everything in the world belongs to that ultimate reality. Not only is it the ultimate reality, but I in my true essence and you in your true essence are that ultimate reality. Your true essence yourself with a capital S is that infinite cosmic consciousness. This strange formula here, it cuts the possibility of viewing myself or any of the elements of myself in relation to something like the cosmic consciousness. I am not belonging to anyone, that deity, that cosmic consciousness. There's nothing in my makeup that belongs to that. Even though I might have been attached to that view and it might have been extremely helpful, beautiful, liberating, heart-opening view at another level, now I cut it. Remember what we said about provisional truth. I'm going to another level now. I am not anything belonging to anyone, any deity for instance, anywhere, nor is there anything belonging to me in anyone, anywhere. I also am not taking the seat of identification with for instance the cosmic consciousness or anything like that so that all this belongs to me. If you get to this point in practice, strange as these whole formulas sound and puzzling and baffling and arcane, it's still worth really playing with. Sometimes even when we only half understand something, they have a magical power. Generally that has contradicted what I said earlier. If you say fabricate or empty, it has to really mean something to you. You have to really understand it. Contradicting myself, there's also the possibility, I have no idea what the hell this means here, but I'm just going to try playing with this and something happens. That's for later. Then again the Buddha says, practicing a frequently abiding in this way, his mind acquires confidence in that dimension. In the realm of nothingness opens up in that whole mystical depth of that. Again we're talking about insight ways of looking. We're not talking about pondering, we're talking about something that's very light, liquid, agile, very, very subtle, but has immense power. I want to return to those insight ways of looking and their relationship with this dimension of nothingness in a bit, but just practically speaking in terms of technique, etc. Here we are again. I really want to dissolve in this. I want to dissolve in this nothingness as much as I can. There will be, as in all the jhanas, there will be a subtle polarity between subject and object. Object here is the nothingness, but there will still be some degree of a subtle polarity, a subtle sense of separation, a subtle duality there. There's still the same thing, still sassy, still sassy. But the A again, absorption, how much can I dissolve in this? It's an open direction, so it doesn't end. We're trying to absorb more. We're trying to dissolve more, but we will never totally absorb. Even if you feel like you're totally absorbed in it, it's just that you haven't noticed a subtle remnant of subject-object duality there, of subject-object polarity there. We cannot totally erase or collapse the subject-object duality without much deeper insight ways of looking. I know in many circles it's very popular and very quick off the tongue to say no subject-object duality and there was no self and there's no all this. It's very easy to say that, but again, this is why so much emphasis on subtlety, discernment, discrimination, attunement, really noticing there is still a subtle subject-object duality here and unless I move the insight to a whole other level, which hopefully we'll talk about in the next couple of days, that is not going to collapse. Usually when people talk about, yeah, there was no self and there's no duality and there's no conception, it's just that they're not paying close enough attention to what's going on. They haven't noticed something. There hasn't been the training in the subtle discerning and discrimination. When we talk about non-conceptual awareness, when we talk about the total collapse of subject-object duality, we're talking about something extremely rare and extremely strange and that takes quite a rare and sophisticated and profound and subtle insight to collapse, to go beyond. Very speaking, I want to keep this, A is open-ended. I will never reach the end of A, it's open-ended, the absorption. Just try and dissolve mind and body in this nothingness as much as one can. Again, this forward-leaning business, again, we can configure this nothingness upright, so there's less, it's in front of me and I'm kind of falling into it or the mind is getting sucked into it or trying to probe it in front of me. Or I put it where the body is. There's nothingness where, it's here. It's not just in front of me, it's here too, in the space of where the body used to be. Or I configure it 360 degrees around. All this can help with that sort of strong tendency to lean that happens for many people. Depending on how one approached it, just like the infinite consciousness, a lot of things about working with it depend on which route one has taken into it. If one's going just from these insight ways of looking, whether one considers this is empty of self, this is empty of anything belonging to a self, the this is really anything at all. It's anything that arises and it could be the perceptions of normal sensory awareness. And one starts with that, the perception of my body, the perception of this pain, the perception of this PT, whatever. And one just keeps training the insight way of looking on, let's say it starts with a pain, pain in my tummy. And I just keep looking at it with the same insight way of looking. What's going to happen? Probably the pain fades, probably it goes through a phase where there's PT arising, maybe it goes through some of the jhanas, maybe the train doesn't stop there, you're just kind of seeing the station out the window and it goes by as it's fading. And then it starts to open up into deeper senses of fading. So the this there from the insight wavelength could be anything. And it might be if one is approaching it that way through the insight ways of looking or sometimes if one is approaching it other ways from let's say the infinite consciousness. It could be that still other perceptions are arising. And this is quite important because some people say, oh, they're not gone, they're not and they get, oh, this is, you know, they need to disappear. And one gets into a bit of a tizzy about that, very subtle tizzy. If that's happening, then what's really, really skillful is to regard them as no things. They are not things. In other words, the same the same insight way of looking is just trained on them. Now by that point, it might be that I don't even need the whole it's empty and it's just there are no thing. This thing is a no thing. It's a no thing. It's a no thing. Or they're fabrications. Again, I need to understand what that means. This sound I hear that plane or whatever it is, it's it's fabrication that sense perception. I need to understand that. Or they're just perceptions which imply. So that's an interesting one. The insight way of looking just perception has many alternative subtexts. So it can mean, and I think when some people hear or I've taught it in the past, take it to mean and it's totally valuable for it to mean at one level. What it means is this is just awareness in substance, whatever this sound or this pain or this thought is just awareness in substance. So it's taking the insight and the perception from what from the vastness of awareness and it's applying it as an insight way of looking. Is it just a perception? It's just awareness in substance. But here we need to go beyond that. And if I say just a perception, it really means it's fabricated. It's a deeper insight. It's just a perception meaning it's just something that's fabricated as all perceptions are. So we might use as a sort of as our tincture for an insight way of looking just this very subtle just a perception for example or something like that, whatever the tincture is. But it's important to read the small print. It's important to know what does it mean because the small print will determine what happens. If I'm viewing it as just a perception but what I really mean or what I really understand by that is it's just the same substance as awareness. It will take me to the vastness of awareness or maybe the infinite consciousness. But if my just a perception has the small print just fabricated because all perceptions are fabricated then it takes me deeper. Make sense? Or again this is when perceptions are still arising that the nothingness is sort of there but it's sort of stuff at the edges that's and one feels like it's not completely pure yet. One again could regard those perceptions as dukkha. Dukkha because perceptions are not peaceful which corresponds to the first of the of the Buddha's three insight ways of looking. They're dukkha but it has to be that we're not talking about aversion there. If that's dukkha that's dukkha and it's got irritation in it and aversion that's not going to take me deeper. It will take me out of the whole depth because aversion is a fabricator and we're moving in the direction of less fabrication. You understand? So you have to be careful with these kinds of things and these insight ways of looking that aversion doesn't get woven in subtly. It will it has a very strong effect when it does that. So you're really trying to view without aversion and it's dukkha. It's unsatisfactory. It's dukkha because it's a perception and perceptions are not peaceful as the Buddha says but that doesn't mean there's aversion to them. So it's a real these insight ways of looking of very very as I said subtle light agile liquid but very finely poised as well. There's something very again to the degree of the delicacy and the subtlety of the poise is the degree of their power. So actually what I've just described this kind of not quite pure parygianic state. It's like in the neighborhood of the nothingness or the nothingness is there but the mind hasn't kind of completely entered into it or it's kind of half in and half out or mostly in and there's a little bit there. This not quite pure whatever we call it parygianic state it may be actually more useful because of the opportunity to practice those ways of looking at objects and at sense perceptions and mental perceptions right then. Again we tend to think oh it's not going well or we judge it dependent on how deep the absorption etc but the very fact that it's that it's kind of not quite in yet gives us more opportunity to look in a certain way at these perceptions and that may be more useful than when it's just completely purely emptied out. Because it's that it's the ability to look at it's the ability to sense and to relate to perceptions in these ways with these insight ways of looking that's what's most liberating. That's what brings the radical change in the radical openings of view. Our ability to be in the world of things to engage things knowing they are empty. So this kind of it's not quite settled yet state of with regard to the realm of nothingness gives us the opportunity to practice ways of looking right then in this kind of in between state that one might judge as I haven't really got it gives us the opportunity to practice ways of looking that are in the end actually more powerful. So this whole thing this whole realm of nothingness and everything that goes with it is an experience and or an understanding of emptiness at a very deep but not yet total ultimate level. So when we're talking about the dimension of nothingness we should be we should be understanding emptiness at a very deep level from it with it or on our way to it. It's wrapped up in the dimension of nothing should be an understanding at a very deep level of emptiness it's not the final ultimate deepest level of emptiness but it's still really important. So again we can talk about nothingness and no thingness but they're really just two sides of the same coin. The advantage I think of working from the insight ways of looking as the Buddha described as we went through very briefly there and as in a lot more detail and seeing it freeze and the advantage of working that way is because those insights get consolidated more. So especially number two and three this is empty of a self or of what belongs to a self there's I'm not anything belonging to anyone anywhere nor is there anything belonging to me in anyone anywhere. These ones are they're empowering a view of emptiness with regard to phenomena the phenomena of of the world the phenomena of our life. The first one perceptions aren't peaceful let me go for something without perceptions where there's where there's more peace again you can hear the danger of dualism there right you can hear the danger of a dualistic attachment. In a way what I've just said you know we could say the Samadhi here you know is how absorbed am I in the state is actually less valuable than the insight. The degree of my absorption etc into the state may be less valuable than the insight that comes from the state or on my way to it or around it or in the after effects. I would say I would say that the insight is actually more important than the degree of Samadhi here. So no thing or the emptiness of things and the understanding of the no thingness of things of the absence of inherent existence of things that really ultimately there are no things. The understanding of that while we're perceiving things this is as I said immensely liberating so freeing in its pension. It's a very profound understanding and it has different levels to it lots of different levels to it at least the way I would teach it. Understanding the same understanding of no thingness at deeper and deeper levels that's the usual way I would teach emptiness is you just kind of go one level consolidate that and then to a whole other level of what the same thing means what it means to say something is empty what it means to say there are no things. But even at not such a profound level it can be enormously liberating so much potency of potential freedom there. When there's no thing when we begin to sense that or be able to see there's no thing here really then there's the possibility that we can be with something with either no or much less sense of imprisonment in with regard to that thing much less sense or no sense of imprisonment in with or by any form whether that form is a relationship one feels. You know claustrophobic in whether it's a work situation that one feels hampered by stuck in constricted by whether it's any kind of situation or social situation or social and ongoing social kind of construction that one finds oneself in whether it's an illness whether it's a retreat and the bonds of of finitude where there's where there's finitude we can feel imprisoned by those edges can all kinds of ways you just have to ponder this and actually see where there's a thing there's the possibility of imprisonment in relation to with by in that thing. So understanding this no thing as being able to relate to a thing see a thing be in a thing I'm using thing obviously in a very broad sense now to be able to see that way and know it's no thing this can open up tremendous freedom the end of a sense of imprisonment one is free the bars are still there one is free. Sometimes used to say to people years ago you know sometimes it's really good like for example in walking meditation and so what can't I just go for a walk same thing I'll walk I'll do it mindfully and I used to say no walk up and down and up and down and up and down you have beginning and you have an end closed form and then sometimes I would say to people and and do walking meditation for a period for six hours or more six seven eight hours walk walk walk until you see the illusion of the closeness of that form of course I have to incline my mind to that insight here I'm imprisoned I can't be if I'm not free to go any I'm just walking up and down in this body until one sees through sees through the form sees through any sense of imprisonment in that form sees the emptiness of walking so this applies to what we're talking about here applies to so many other things so many forms so many structures so many imprisonment it's an emptiness insight and it's related to this no thing no thingness business of the seventh jhana and as I said there's many different levels of this but even at a kind of more conventional level we can as I said just for don't know what all this means just walk just for example do your walking meditation hours and hours and hours until you see through the what looks like a restricted form you're free so the samadhi as I said may be may be less valuable than insight here and there's a way as we've been talking about the jhana should bring certain insights it will bring certain insights when one goes into this level dimension nothing is it should bring certain insights but certainly the insight ways of looking will deliver the jhana so the causality again works both ways but if I go if I enter this jhana and this dimension of nothing if I go via the insight ways of looking and it will tend to reinforce those insights more I will learn those insights more because they've been part of how I've got there as well so in the jhana as I said you can have a sense of nothingness and a sense of no thingness and it can be slightly different I mean the actual jhana is really a sense of nothingness the insight is of no thingness it's the the latter the sense of no thingness the recognition of no thingness that's most important for insight even if I this is an interesting one if I just have an experience of nothingness deep nothingness to me it should lead to the insights that the Buddha is talking about emptiness of phenomenal self etc it should lead to the insight that there are no things really but again the power of conceptual framework because I've heard and read people talk about this and they don't this state and they seem to have very good absorption into it but they don't seem to have kind of sucked the juice from it in terms of the most relevant and the deepest insight from it so all very well the absorption is good and fantastic and you can hold your mind there but where's the liberating insight from it so it could be again that because of a conceptual framework which isn't relating these things to emptiness there is actually a stranglehold on the growth of insight but it may be that the force of the jhanic experience anyway opens that but I do know cases where that's not the case and to me it points again to the hidden power of conceptual frameworks and how again how important is to pay attention to conceptual frameworks and just see are they are we adopting and using and relying on the most powerful conceptual frameworks the ones that make the most sense the ones that point in the right direction are we are we picking the right thing from the fruit tree are we walking away with something else like a a twig or something and not an apple and then so the view then that comes that becomes available and the understanding and also the after effect on perception here is one moves in the world afterwards and one's clearly moving in a world of things but they're at the same time felt and seem to be in some very mysterious way not things it's a thing and it's not a thing and it's hard to put that into language but one way of saying that is is these understandings and these perception attainments they don't make us dysfunctional in the world like I'm now unable to drink water because I can't sense a thing there of course I can sense a thing but I can also sense it as not a thing no thing it's as I said related to emptiness it does not mean impermanence okay emptiness is way beyond impermanence when we talk about the no thingness of things we're not saying there's not really a glass of water here there's not really glass here there's not really water here what there are is the really really rapid arising and passing of either perceptions or atoms or whatever it is that's impermanence it might be super fast impermanence that's not emptiness so that would be an example if I took the insight of rapid impermanence from all this business of no thingness and this genre I would be taking I don't know a twig from the apple tree and not the apple no thing emptiness this is much much deeper much more powerfully liberating than impermanence so again there's certain recurrent themes through all this and still with this with this level of opening and this mystical kind of revelation really it still brings meta meta comes from it just like all the other genres the meta here you know luscious profound flavored with the depth of mystery and flavored with the depth of the mystery of no thingness of thingness and no thingness at the same time of emptiness matter at a whole other level and again we can ask why meta why meta everything's disappearing there's no thing but there's also then no less emphasis on the differences there's certainly less emphasis on this self and the interests of the self and the selfish interests of this self over and above others but even more there's a kind of again there's oneness just like just like these the other arupa jhanas that we've talked about oneness another whole level of oneness another whole level of mystical oneness opens up with these perceptions so we had the oneness of materiality this sort of woven togetherness of our bodies of our matter of all matter with all matter in the universe we had the oneness of awareness from the infinite consciousness the one the mysterious oneness of our consciousnesses and here we have a kind of oneness of essence or substance but that essence is a kind of essence of emptiness you use essence almost in inverted commas the substance of all beings and all things the substance of all phenomena essence of all beings or phenomena is recognized is felt to be emptiness but we have to use that word essence a little carefully and that's a whole other level of mystical oneness that the heart opens to so it's emptiness understood at a certain level there or some bandwidth of levels pertaining to the seventh jhana so matter comes as we would expect by now and one further opening of oneness so just to linger on the meta piece later after you've developed this for a while and and also with the development of other emptiness practices again we can make cocktails so we can mix perhaps certain brahma vihara practices maybe meta or karuna compassion practice with for instance this sense of no thingness or emptiness there is as we talked about the spectrum of fading spectrum of unfabricating and it's possible with practice it's possible to play with with perception which is again one way of construing everything that we're doing one way of construing what the whole Dharma is we're playing with perception and play along that spectrum of fading so that self and other fade to a great degree and phenomena as well there's a partial fading of this being or that being who one is then directing meta towards they become extremely insubstantial barely there because they're faded just on on the sort of cusp of completely completely fading out and diaphanous there they're on the verge of fading but still they're there as an object as a person knowing that they're empty so there's a knowing that they're empty they're empty of inherent existence there's an experientially that that knowing of their emptiness is empowering an insight way of looking which is empowering the fading down to a point where they're just they're just kind of appearing teetering on the edge and then the love them and then practicing the matter or the karuna towards this empty person that balance somewhere on on a cusp of fading and appearance so they're barely there they're appearing but they're barely there they're barely formed they're half faded yet they're distinct they're just about distinct as this person or that person etc and doing that and then and then adding adding into this alchemical mix adding your meta towards this person or your karuna towards this person empowers the matter or the current or whole other level and some people think well if someone's empty surely I'm not gonna have meta because they're empty right but no if you actually practice it it takes the the love and the compassion to a whole other level the whole other empowerment and actually this kind of thing playing with the spectrum of fading through an insight way of looking making cocktails etc there's all kinds of options that start opening up all kinds of games we can play and be very creative here all kinds of beauty and and wonder that can open up in this territory in a way one could say this is the territory now of tantric practice of Vajrayana ideally I would say it comes from this knowing of emptiness this understanding of emptiness and this ability to actually control if you like or play with perception to a certain degree so that things don't just completely fade and then I can't do anything there's nothing because everything's completely gone but nor are they nor things or beings reified and solid they're in this diaphanous divine empty yet appearing on the cusp of fading yet appearing they're in that place and it's a magical place and it's a place of potent magic in in the Mahayana teachings it said that only a Buddha not an Arahant not a not a fully in line person in the Tara Varn teach only a Buddha a complete Buddha can both fully view something or someone as empty at the same time that they still perceive that thing or that that someone as empty still perceive them as as as someone or something for all the rest of us when I view X or Y or this person or that person or this phenomenon that phenomena is empty if I if if again that that makes sense to me what it means and I'm applying it in this agile subtle way and viewing this as empty that thing will disappear it will fade only a Buddha can fully view something as empty and still perceive it that's a core but and fundamental but not very well known Mahayana teaching and it has enormous implications so that what would one is one way of construing what one's doing when you're practicing Vajrayana visualization practices and seeing appearances as divine and some of you will never have heard of this some of you will have is your mimicking you're deliberately mimicking the mind of a Buddha and that capacity of a Buddha to do just that to to understand and view something as empty at the same time you're actually perceiving it without it completely fading so that Vajrayana that kind of practice is is just this pretend mimicking of being a Buddha and if you do that enough that's one way to become a Buddha is you just imitate a Buddha and then you become a Buddha that's all my own Vajrayana teaching I'm just mentioning it but a couple of things from that and they're significant well that I think that's very significant in all kinds of ways and certainly as practice options hugely significant and and you know immensely beautiful playgrounds open up immensely beautiful realms and possibilities open up there but there's a couple of points I want to draw out from what I've just been talking about so one is about about this malleability of perception with with the emptiness and the fading I come back to that the other again is revisiting our theme of desire and said there's this for iti padad that the Buddha talked about desire is one of them and then we keep touching on it in this retreat and one of the things I said and I've said it now I've pulled it out something to talk about twice and a third time now at least I think is again what is it exactly I'm desiring from practice and that what exactly is the mix of desires the precise mix of my desires that brings me to practice that keeps me practicing that takes me to retreats or whatever it is what's in there what those desires are has a tremendous influence on them what unfolds let's say on a retreat or in your practice or in your life so that if if if one of those desires or even the main desire for practice is to be to open my heart and for the heart to be touched and that's really what takes me to practice and that's maybe what brings me on on a Jhana retreat somehow that may seem a bit of a strange choice of retreat you know why would you go on if you want that why would you choose a Jhana retreat necessarily and again talking about this that the influence of of exactly what what it is that I desire the influence of that on what unfolds and what becomes possible because if that's my primary intention maybe conscious it may be semi-conscious then I it's probably not enough to sustain the intention for Jhana's and for Jhana practice that's probably I mean it's a wonderful intention but it's probably not enough to actually show up hour after hour on a retreat like this or some or a longer Jhana retreat to actually sustain this is what I'm doing and I'm not getting distracted this is this is the primary thing I'm doing I'm occasionally doing something else but this is what I'm doing we've talked over and over about just how hard that is to sustain that intention and also just how important it is to sustain that intention because without it sustaining things won't open up they just they'll open up in a very limited way but they won't unfold to these kinds of deaths or any any real Jhana deaths hard to sustain that difficult to sustain that intention a single intention like that but if my kind of primary thing that I'm looking for wanting from practice is the hard to be touched or open then as I said it's probably not enough to sustain that intention it's probably not enough to keep working and playing for instance in the ways that we're we've been taught because I'm actually interested in in something else it's hard to see the connection and I'll be drawn to other things because they're more in line or they're more obviously in line with my desire so this might seem a strange thing to say at this point of the tree but again partly I'm talking to the recordings when I talk but but there's a more general principle which applies anyway and I want to really reinforce that general principle so if I'm interested in any deep practice developing any deep practice Jhana's emptiness whatever it is then I really have to understand I'm saying it again I really have to understand desire and I have to understand my relationship with desire and that has to be authentic and I have to understand what I tend to do or not do with desire and I have to understand what the influences are of different desires and and all of that which is just repeating what I've said before so it's this general principle that is really important if there was someone listening to the recordings who starts listening let's say to the recordings from this retreat but really what they're mostly wanting is open-heartedness and for their heart to be touched or something which may not even be something they've articulated consciously to themselves it's probably the case that they will have given up listening to the recordings by now but the general principle is really important about what we're talking about that desire and really being clear about what the desires are so that's one thing but the second thing I think was again is really important and because it is true and I if most of you will have got this sense it is true that the Jhana's open the heart can I say that now and you feel that that's a yeah it should be you should have a real sense of like wow these this really has an impact on the heart that the capacity of the heart to be touched the capacity of the heart to hold ranges of and depths and beauties of emotion and and also difficult emotion and all that Jhana's do open the heart enormously in ways and on levels that perhaps before really engaging in such practices and staying with them and pursuing and and kind of staying with the intention and working in these ways would have been undreamed of the way the heart open we wouldn't have never have occurred to us that the heart could open in such ways or at such levels again now again if consciously or semi-consciously I have a conception or a conceptual framework or an idea or an image of what heart opening love or even sensitivity is one word that we've been using if I have an idea an image a notion a conception of what those things mean heart opening love sensitivity for example what they mean what they look like what they involve what they need if my idea is limited then it might be that there is a limited range and possibility and depth of heart opening because my very conception even if it's an if it's semi-conscious is limiting what's possible for the heart it's limiting the heart opening it's possible one remains confined in the presupposed limits again not even they weren't even conscious perhaps in fact the danger is even more and especially so when we think but I just want my heart to open I don't I'm not really into a conceptual framework so I don't I'm not really a conceptual person I'm just kind of open because I want my heart to be open so I keep my mind open but actually it's not there's a there's an idea there there's a limit there's an idea an image and notion of what heart opening or being touched or whatever means involves needs looks like and that limited idea is limiting what's actually possible so heart opening is endless I would say it's endless there's no end to heart opening there's no end is endless in terms of what it is and also what it includes and what it involves it's endless if we let it be endless meaning if we let the heart open but also if we let the mind be not limited in terms of what it means again the power of conception the power of conceptual frameworks the power of notions and ideas conscious or unconscious is enormous really really enormous this is something to really explore again we can talk about jhanas and there's other issues like desire and desire and idea or conception that have have power and and have determinative power over much much more than we recognize and and they have deterrence power over what will open for us as human beings or what remains closed we don't even understand why is it remaining closed or we don't even recognize it remains closed until we hear other people talking about things oh why haven't that experience okay last thing relating back to the emptiness was talked about the meta and the love and the desire and again coming back to our theme of malleability of perception so it should be I would say that let's say to the degree that one has realized the emptiness of things and I mean that's a spectrum it's really a spectrum so we're talking about the emptiness of things can be realized at a very everyday not big deal level it's still really really important and it can be you know realized it all the way down incredibly deep everything in between but that realization of the emptiness of things it or the no thingness of things and for many people it legitimizes and opens up the possibilities for playing with perception even more for the malleability of perception so on the opening talk in the opening talk I think it was the opening talk I am well very near the beginning of the retreat anyway I said something just recognizing and wanting wanting to sort of acknowledge together and out loud the fact that I knew that many of you would have have been for instance very active working in activism of different sorts recently and particularly with activism around climate change and species loss and the environment and this kind of thing and arrived at the retreat kind of very tired from all that and the craziness of if you were an XR rebellions and things tired wired and grieving so that was a possibility and someone who indeed did arrive at that retreat and after lots of dedicated activism wired tired and grieving left a beautiful note the other day so I can read it to you and then say a few things about it she says this morning so this is on you know wired tired and grieving from from all that activism and then on this retreat and then this morning I decided to walk in walk in sukkah okay so walk with the primary nimitta of the second Jhana being being surrounded and welcomed by it rather than walking in a sukkah bubble of my energy body so the usual instruction has been to keep the sukkah if we're doing sukkah if you're going for a walk keep it in the energy body bubble space right so I've tried something different I want to walk surrounded by it and rather than just in the energy bubble and says excuse me for many months I found it nearly impossible to enjoy being in nature although I was in amazing places in the natural world and mainly perceived perceived it perceived nature as wounded deeply ailing dying etc a perception that is not only very painful but also as I was very aware of not always helpful or sustainable for the being this morning all was radiating or being an expression or manifestation of happiness the very fabric of the cosmos was sukkah this was very beautiful and healing yet what was even more profound and made me cry was that not only was all an expression of sukkah but that the cosmos or all or it question mark was delighted and happy at my activism no matter how flawed mad confused it may be the activism at times it the cosmos the world the nature rejoiced in it no matter what the outcome so just want to analyze this a little bit so beautiful experience very healing there's the jhanic familiarity in this case with the second genre and there's at least some degree of mastery maybe complete no some degree because we said the walking walking with the sukkah is part of the elements of mastery is jhanic familiar some degree of mastery and then the choice deliberately not to contain it to the energy body as would be relevant to the second genre but to allow it to become huge and cosmic if you like so in soul making dharma the distinction I want to make here is one that pertains to for to soul making dharma etc but in so many times we have this word cosmopoiesis which really pertains which really means cosmos and poasis are making or creating or an art of perceiving the cosmos a certain way of sensing the cosmos a certain way so they went they came here a cosmopoiesis at first but that cosmopoiesis wasn't fully imaginal or it could be that there's a cosmon that say I'm not sure how quite what the order or the pacing of how things unfolded it doesn't matter the point I want to make is we can have a cosmopoiesis and as someone shared in the note the other day the fabric of the universe being joy so here's the fabric of the universe being sukkah same there's a cosmopoiesis but we can have a cosmopoiesis that's not fully imaginal okay it's just cosmopoiesis it's an after-effect of perception it's a malleability of perception what the sense of the cosmos is then in this report that cosmopoiesis becomes more imaginal why what's the difference one of the differences is the self gets drawn into the soul making dynamic it's not just the universe is has its fabric of joy delightful as that is incredibly beautiful mystical lovely experiences that is when it gets to being imaginal when we get into soul making territory something else starts to happen and the self gets drawn into the soul making dynamic the self becomes image to some extent and then from that other elements of as we talk about the lattice what's it called the lattice of the imaginal the nodes the different elements of the imaginal will start to get drawn in because the self has become imaginal and that's very different from an experience where there's joy the cosmos is joy its essence its substance is joy but the self is not really drawn into the experience it's prominent it's enjoying it it's touched by it but it hasn't become personal in that way that makes sense so one one of the moves one of the occurrences that sends it then into imaginal territory and it's not really a black and white division like all these things and with jhanas is that is that the becoming imaginal of the self of the self sense not just the objects not just the world but the self as well and back to fantasies of the path what supports our desire what supports our intention etc here then is the possibility an image opened up but involved the image of the self and of nature and of the cosmos both self other world became imaginal but in a way the potential here for that very image and the the what the words the delight and the happiness and the rejoicing in her activism in the narrative of the self in the dedication and and even the willingness of the self to do this work mad as it seemed ineffectual as it seemed difficult as it seemed painful as it seemed the narrative and the dukkha of the self become image they get drawn into the image different than just a cosmopoiesis the fabric of the cosmos becoming joy or whatever and the self remains very quiet very much in the background it's different level but that possibility then can become you know immensely helpful in the long term for instance as a fantasy as an image that really ramps up the support long term for working at difficult things working through difficult times whatever it is if you're on a retreat and it's difficult what's the fantasy of the path we've talked about what's the view in this case it's activism no matter what the outcome the blessings of when things get imaginal that way is they get liberated because of the eternality of the imaginal territory they get liberated from the from a dependency on the outcome so one's free to work free to be with the painter supported by the beauty and the soulfulness and the depth of the fantasy that touches the self and not so hampered by and worried by and limited by what their outcome might be and yet more stills working full out for it but supported by this whole other dimension of being the imaginal sense and then this support in the long term to be able to sustain one's one's soul desires one's deep desires through the difficult through the long term without the heart having to close without the heart having to close to grief to pain to possible failure and a threat of possible failure so it's not a soulmaker sheep I wanted to say this because again desire and understanding desire and understanding has a lot to do with being able to open up to what we want to open up to being able to do what we set out to do and sustain that and there's also this connection with the malleability of perception which starts to we've talked about it from the beginning of this retreat and this realm of no thingness and we talk about the emptiness of things the as I said the legitimacy and the possibility of the malleability perception just open up even more goes to a whole other level so relevant in a few ways okay let's let's have some quiet time together okay thank you everybody time for tea please consider supporting Dharma seed with a year-end gift your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all visit Dharma seed org donate to learn more and thanks

 Before we get onto the teachings properly, I mentioned at the beginning of the retreat that in many ways the retreat happening at all has been somewhat of a miracle for lots of different reasons and that Robert had, we had initially gambled on, gambled at his employers would give him the time, you know, the time off work to come and then it turned out that they were only given a partial time to come and then Kirsten heroically sacrificed a full retreat to sit this retreat fully and join with the teaching and so it's been a bit of a patchwork in that sense but it's happening and now, in fact tomorrow, the time has already come for Robert to say goodbye as his employers demand his services on Monday morning, I assume, yes Monday morning, so he will be leaving us about lunchtime tomorrow after his interviews and just again, I really want to say how grateful, how absolutely hugely grateful I am and I think we all are to you for being here and using your holiday time to do that and also to Kirsten for stepping in, the retreat couldn't have happened so this kind of patchwork of tag team teachers was the only way this could have happened and so we're really, really grateful to Robert and everything that you've brought here and your spirit and your knowledge and also to Kirsten, very much that willingness to step in and offer and share and be there for everyone so Robert will slip out quietly with belly full after lunch yesterday, tomorrow, so if it's too much emptiness of time you get a little bit confused. Do you want to say anything? You don't have to? You do? Good, yeah. So I guess I wanted to just say that anything with your love to me, seeing your practice and your patience and perseverance has really touched me and brought much super. And as I'm leaving I guess my wish for you all would be during these last few days, it's victory lap of the retreat where the conditions are so rare and so precious that your intentions are strong and that the fire will launch you to burn and satisfy the enterprise. Thank you. Yeah, and actually just to echo that last point, you all probably know how it is on retreats, we have I think four days left, something like that and if this was a week retreat this would be like really towards the end, the mind starts sensing it's towards the end. Papancia, right in the bounce. Because don't give a damn, they'll be coming and going, you're up and down, you're wherever you are in your little or big wiggles. As Robert said, keeping steady, keeping going, this is so much a part of the art, the fundamentals of the art of this practice, the fundamentals of any practice, the fundamentals of staying in relationship, staying with a project that you love, it's so crucial. How is your intention? How's that doing? What am I believing? Am I again, this thing we've come back to several times, am I buying into what the seeds of the hindrances have spawned and then it's a story and it's very, very convincing and then my intention is wobbling. They're seductive and they seduce us, the hindrances of Papancia seduce us into believing this or that because that's so, so convincing. These are precious days, these whatever it is, four days are in precious days, precious opportunity to practice, to go further, to learn more about this territory but also everything around this territory that we've talked about, my personal relationship with desire and intention and steadiness and form and all that. So again, once more the invitation to work, play, enjoy and find out. Okie doke. So today we will talk about the sixth Jhana which the Buddha didn't call the sixth Jhana but called the realm of infinite consciousness, the realm of infinite consciousness, the sphere or the base of infinite consciousness and hoping for him to shed great light on what's involved here as he goes through the stages describing a practitioner practicing, the thought occurs to him after he's gone through first of all Jhana's fifth Jhana, thought occurs to him, what if I with the complete transcending of the sphere of the realm of the infinite of space, realizing that consciousness is infinite were to enter and remain in the realm of the infinite of consciousness. Without jumping at the realm of the sphere of the infinite of consciousness he enters and remains in the sphere of this infinite of consciousness. He sticks with that theme, develops it, pursues it and establishes himself firmly in it. There's not a lot to go on there other than stick with it, develop it, pursue it, establish it and it's something to do with consciousness and again it's very very big. Ok, what is this, what's he pointing to here? What's involved in this perception attainment, this opening, this, this? I would say the principle, the central feature if you like is awareness knowing itself, awareness knowing itself. Sometimes I've heard it described as actually it's awareness knowing the infinitude of space, in other words it's the consciousness of the fifth genre and there's certainly a way that it can seem like that but I think, I've come more to think that the primary feature is just awareness knowing itself and then that, there's an infinite expanse of that but either way I think awareness knowing infinite space or the awareness that knows infinite space or the awareness knowing itself I tend to think the second there, the awareness knowing itself is primary. I should say right now that I use the words awareness and consciousness completely interchangeably over the last 30, 40, 45 years or so, there's been different kind of, not really trends but people, some people have at times drawn those two words apart and referred to consciousness as something that's much more smaller, it's one of the aggregates, it's impermanent, it's unsatisfactory, it's narrow, it's tied to objects etc. and awareness as something vast, free, even ultimate so they give awareness a capital A etc. I don't ultimately buy into that so I think it's actually clearer to just use the words interchangeably, awareness and consciousness and then we get different, I have to explain different senses or perceptions of the nature of awareness at different times and they have different, what we might say relative truth value. Anyway, all we need to know for now is I will use those words completely synonymously and interchangeably. The awareness knowing itself, what's happening here is there's a kind of honing in, tuning to and honing in on awareness, on consciousness, consciousness hones in on consciousness, awareness hones in on awareness. The Pali word is vinyana and there isn't by the way a distinction in Pali between a word for consciousness and a word for awareness. Vinyana is I think the grammatical term in Pali, it's a verbal noun, I think that's the correct word so it literally translates as knowing. Awareness or consciousness or knowing are synonymous terms. What does awareness mean? In Buddhist understanding it means knowing. So it doesn't mean knowing something, I know something, I'm clever because I know what the square root of two is to eight decimal places. It means knowing, it means being conscious, it means the recognition of something, the perception of something. So there's this kind of again and again in this state, there's this almost returning to and a kind of locking in on the sense of knowing. Because depending on how you access it you can use again these little grains, little tinctures of whispers, internal whispers in the mind to direct the mind and help support it to kind of lock in on that primary nimitta. So the primary nimitta is consciousness, the primary nimitta is consciousness knowing itself and you can use these little tinctures just like knowing, knowing or consciousness or whatever it is just to help, very, very subtle, help support the mind in its attuning to, finding and then sustaining its focus on the sense of knowing. There's a very subtle whisper internally to direct the attention to the sense of knowing. I would say, this is a long, long debate in certainly in Buddhist history and in the Mahayana as well as the Theravada and the Vajrayana, et cetera. I would say, and it's probably a debate outside of Buddhist history as well, Buddhist philosophy and psychology, but I would say consciousness of consciousness is an integral aspect of consciousness. In other words, to be conscious involves the subtle, at least the subtle kind of recognition that one is conscious in the moment. Otherwise, a machine can be aware of this or that, but a machine doesn't have consciousness. It doesn't recognize itself, it doesn't have that feeling of being aware. I would say there's been a long debate about this, but in a way I think it's a little bit ridiculous. It's just part of the definition of consciousness, that consciousness in any moment is conscious of itself. Do you understand what I mean by that? Usually, so that's what we mean when we say this person is conscious or that machine is not conscious or I was conscious, et cetera. Usually that sense of being conscious is not something that it's very much in the mix of a moment of consciousness. There's much more attention to what we're conscious of, the object, this or that thing that I'm paying attention to, this or that object of consciousness. To some degree, some subtle degree mixed in with any moment of consciousness and as part of what defines it as consciousness, as I said, is some small degree of a sense that there is consciousness right now and it goes with the subject, I am conscious, this is conscious. That subtle sense, that subtle portion if you like or strand within consciousness can be amplified. Again, how do things get amplified? They get first they need to be noticed, then they need to be attuned to and that attuning to what we notice amplifies it. In other words, in the mix of what consciousness is in any moment, by noticing this sense of being conscious, this awareness of awareness, by noticing it and tuning to it repeatedly amplifies that sense within consciousness until eventually the relative balance can go from mostly I'm conscious of the object, whatever the object is I'm paying attention to until and very little sense of the consciousness of consciousness. With noticing it, tuning to it and the amplification that will happen naturally with that, that can start to reverse and it starts to be that eventually all the attention, all the consciousness is the consciousness of consciousness. Does that make sense? There's this lock effect, lock canals, water when they do that. Do you have that in Israel? Because it's a desert, you don't know. Like that, yeah. Can you just either look at something right now or feel a body sensation or listen to the heating sound? So there's the object, the sound, the sensation, the visual object, whatever it is. And at the same time that's there, can you get a sense that there is awareness there, you're conscious of being conscious? Can you be aware of the awareness there? It's mixed in with it. So this is a beginning of something. It's quite a hard thing to stay with, it's a subtle thing. As we go into the genres, everything gets subtler and subtler, but you can train the mind to pick that up and stay with it and amplify it. But we're really talking about in the present moment, this moment, this moment, this moment of awareness and getting the sense of awareness of awareness in the present moment. So this is key to the whole thing. It's subtle and so some of you might not have been able to get a sense that would be very normal, some of you might have practiced already doing this either way, fine. But we're talking about a subtle sense and therefore it needs practice to develop that, to notice it, to stay tuned to it, to kind of develop it. And this, as I'll explain later, there's many ways into this, but this sense of consciousness can then expand. This lock effect, there's no other, all the other objects are kind of filtered out of it and it becomes just an infinite consciousness, infinitely expansive consciousness. And here now again, we're really talking about wow, it's so different, a perception, so different and opening than we usually have as human beings. So I think I shared much earlier in the retreat, someone coming in for an interview and saying, oh yeah, I think I got into the sixth genre the other day and it was all very like, yeah, it can't be. We're really talking about something that's immensely striking and very, very impacting on the consciousness, on the sense of being. So it's a deep realm of existence, a deep, that's what that word ayatana means, explain, a deep realm, a deep dimension of the cosmos, something divine there for sure. That's a sense. It's very intense, so it's quite an intense experience, electric almost I would say, consciousness moment after moment focusing on itself with nothing else there and just an infinite expanse of this. It's electric, it's compelling, it's intense usually. And there's something in that, it's almost like it's sufficient unto itself. There's just consciousness, there's nothing else and this consciousness just knows itself and it pervades infinitely and it has this kind of transcendent quality of being to it's sufficient unto itself. It does not need anything, just consciousness knowing itself forever, eternally sufficient unto itself, eternally transcendent, eternal in the sense of lasting forever. So again, it is as the Buddha calls it, nisarana, nisarana, an escape. It's another dimension of the cosmos, another dimension of being, it's another realm. There is a freedom from everything else there, freedom from the phenomenal material world, a release, a letting go of all else. There's just nothing else there but this pure consciousness knowing itself, sufficient unto itself, infinitely expansive. And the objects are filtered out, everything else gone. So I've mentioned a couple of times on this retreat and I know some of you are familiar in practice with what I call the practice of the vastness of awareness. So it's actually worth lingering on this and comparing the two because they can sound very familiar. They are both infinitely vast consciousness or infinitely vast awareness, both of them totally unperturbed by the arising or passing of phenomena of other things. Both of them, there's a sense that they last forever, that they're eternal in that sense of eternal forever duration, forever undisturbed, forever radiant, forever peaceful. So there's clearly some similarity and people might, well, it's good to distinguish them. Because we've just said there's a letting go of everything else in the sixth jhana, in this infinite consciousness. The vastness of awareness too, if we just compare, is also a letting go. It's quite difficult to pinpoint actually what the differences are but I would say that the vastness of awareness, yes, it's a letting go and it has all those other similarities that I just mentioned in common with this infinite consciousness, this realm of infinite consciousness. But the vastness of awareness also, it more includes phenomena, objects, experiences. It's more inclusive and particularly what it does is it includes and is even accessed by way of its relationship with phenomena, with other experiences. So it's their relationship with the vastness of awareness, that's the key difference. That's one of the key elements including what we might call their substantive relationship. In other words, as I think I mentioned, when one practices vastness of awareness, there's different stages of it. As it moves into its deeper stages, there can be very much this beautiful sense that not only as it was earlier, in earlier stages do phenomena seem to arise out of this vastness of awareness, this beautiful, peaceful, radiant and divine space of awareness. Not only do they rise out and die back in, they're born and they're out of and die back into this source. As it gets deeper, it also feels like their very substance is awareness. So there's a sense that the substantial nature of all phenomena is this awareness, is this vast divine awareness. So that the vastness of awareness also feels like a freedom, but it's a freedom with and within appearances and experiences and phenomena. It's a view or a way of looking or a perspective on phenomena. It's a view, a way of looking, a perspective on phenomena, experience, on this life as we experience this life. It's a different view, sense of this world and this life. Whereas the sixth Jhana is something transcendent, it's beyond, it's gone beyond this world. The infinite consciousness is more intense than the vastness of awareness, which has a sort of almost infinitely deep ease to it. There's a real intensity in the sixth Jhana and it's a much rarer state for people to access for a number of reasons, sometimes because it takes a lot to sustain that intensity or even build up enough intensity that one would find oneself in such a state. It's also much rarer because one can open to the vastness of awareness. The vastness of awareness can open up for one from much more common ways of practicing insight meditation. In fact, if we just practice insight meditation with a more open awareness and then are just aware and let things come and go, let things come and go, it will start to open up the beginning stages of the vastness of awareness so that quite a number of experienced insight meditators will have opened to some degree, to some level, to the vastness of awareness. If you're interested in the vastness of awareness, we mentioned it a couple of times on this retreat. There's a whole chapter, I think, in seeing it freeze on it. In a way, it depends on maybe the three chapters that come before that, but it's there, it should be very, very clear. It's really, really worth that opening and the modicum of trouble it takes to open. It's so worth it. There's also, I think, four guided meditations. I know some of you know this, I think I did years and years ago. They each have the title of space of awareness and they've each got a different subtitle and they're guided meditations of different ways of opening up the vastness of awareness, if I remember. It's a different state. It's not the sixth jhana. You could say it's related, definitely worth visiting and opening to and putting some time in there and being touched by that and the beauty of that and the liberative and healing qualities of that. But rarer, the sixth jhana, the infinite conscious is something rarer. They're also slightly different in there, as I said, in their after effects on perception. Again, in the vastness of awareness, you could get up and go for a walk and see a stone and the substance of the stone is that awareness, is the divine awareness, is this vastness of awareness. Or that stone is somehow the appearance of the stone is the play of this awareness. This is really hard to put your finger on, but I think it would be more accurate to say in the infinite consciousness with the after effect on perception, a phenomenon or a stone or an object feels more as if it has consciousness. Not so much that its substance is awareness, but that it has consciousness, even if it has consciousness as part of a cosmic consciousness. Does this make sense at all? There might be some very abstruse differences if you're not familiar with all this. Which bit? Yeah, so I would say, so now distinguishing in the after effects of perception between these two states, the vastness of awareness and the infinite consciousness. The after effect of perception, the vastness of awareness will be something akin to that the appearance of the stone feels like its substance is awareness or that the appearance of the stone is the play of awareness. Infinite consciousness can feel as if the after effect on perception is more perhaps moving towards the stone has consciousness. And even if that the stone's consciousness is part of a much more unified cosmic consciousness or divine consciousness. So it's hard to articulate. I've never really heard anyone even attempt to make these articulations, but that's my current thinking about it. Both of them though are undisputedly mystical senses of divinity. And it's very often the case that a person will start using words like divine, even if they've never in their life used those words before. Actually either of these two experiences, the vastness of awareness or the infinite consciousness. One really feels as if there is something of a divine order here or something of the nature of the divine that is being revealed to one that's being opened to one. This is God's awareness. It can be the sense. But as we said, the sixth genre, the infinite consciousness is more purely transcendent. It's really a realm beyond, beyond phenomenon. I would say that both of these experiences are immeasurably precious, immeasurably precious, I would say. And I would also say that they're part of our human birthright. As human beings, this is part of what is available to us and what is our human birthright, to know this, to open to this, to be touched by these levels of being, these dimensions of being, these openings. They're available. Simply with infinite consciousness, it brings such, with repeated exposure, it brings such a different sense of existence, such a sense of adding or opening up a sense of the dimensionality of existence of the cosmos of being. There are also many other, I won't go into them now, but there are many variations and of satellite states around the sixth genre, especially when we practice with the eyes open and especially in terms of their after effects on perception. But I just want to, again, take a slight detour, not detour, but again, just to comment about desire is so, so important. It would be, I think it would be really understandable. If someone with repeated going in and out of this infinite consciousness and really being touched by it and opened by it and opening to it and assimilating that opening and that sense and that perception, assimilating that into their sense of existence, it would be really understandable if such a person were to kind of then look back and think to themselves that life knowing that realm is so much richer and so much richer in dimensionality than life not knowing that realm, what they remember from not knowing that realm. It's almost like how would I not, how did I live that way? It would be very, very understandable. And they might also think I wouldn't want to live without knowing this, without that opening, without that sense of dimensionality that they would feel to them in almost retrospect as if that was a kind of impoverishment or they were being, something was taken out of life, an impoverished life in some sense. It felt like life without that would in some way, not that they want to escape there into this transcendent realm, but in some way maybe this person would feel life without that is in a subtle way less worthwhile. That would be very understandable as a view or a feeling. But it's tricky, isn't it? It's tricky. I'm hesitant even saying all this stuff and I don't know how it lands because it's loaded and it's loaded because of many, many things that we've talked about on this retreat so far in terms of desire, in terms of goals, in terms of all that, in terms of what I said yesterday about living in a Western culture that let's say post the Protestant Reformation, starting with the Protestant Reformation, has actually beginning with the Protestant Reformation, there has been this kind of deconstructing and dissolution of any agreed upon idea of what makes life worthwhile and what's etc. So it's a long, don't underestimate how influenced we are not by Buddhist history so much but by Western history. So things that happened in relation to medieval theology influence us today way more often than people realize. So something happened starting with the Protestant Reformation that it fragmented and dissolved any sense of agreed upon idea of what was holy. And that influences very much what anyone can say to anyone else about what is worthwhile or what one should desire, etc. So all this is kind of here when we talk about such states. It's loaded, it's charged in all kinds of ways, potentially painful in all kinds of ways, etc., potentially enticing in all kinds of ways. So the usual insight meditation way of teaching, or at least it used to be, usually insight meditation teaching and you've probably come across is not about experiences. Don't try and get experiences. Just notice what experiences there are, just be mindful. Just notice what comes up and what goes. And to say something or this person saying, or me saying, this is, what did I say? Something that, you know, how precious they were. And even to say that is a little bit loaded, it's implying something. It invites, it opens the door for the pain of striving, the pain of desire that we've revisited several times on this retreat. So the usual way, or what used to be, I don't know if it even is anymore, but the usual way of teaching insight meditation is a lot easier because it effectively just closes the door on any kind of striving like that. All you have to do is be aware. Whatever comes, whatever goes, it's all the same. Good experiences, bad experiences, remarkable experiences, boring experiences. All you have to do is just be aware. And when you're not aware, you just notice it and you come back. And there's such value in that way of practicing and that way of teaching. It's a lot easier. I think for both the student and the teacher, when you start saying, oh, this is really precious or that's really precious or this experience is, you know, then you start running risks, but there's risks both ways. If you go just into the mode of experiences are not important, there are risks. There are significant risks. And all this again is tied into desire and what do I desire and why do I desire what I desire? What's going on with me? What's authentic desire? What's deep desire? What's involved in my desire? And how we teach regarding such experiences, such openings, such perceptions, you know, if one goes into an interview and reports such an experience and what comes back is a response, what comes back from the teacher is a response of sounds good, but it's just another experience. It's impermanent. Let it go. Don't get attached. So that response itself is a kind of teaching. What's set in a framework, again, needs to be at least semi-coherently set, nestled within a whole idea of what awakening and liberation is and what insight is. Yeah. So again, we get this tracing down of what tracing down or feeding down from a top level conception into how I'm responding to this or that experience in any moment or someone else reporting this or that experience in any moment. So if I say immeasurably precious, it's loaded, you know, but it's tricky. And I think it would be understandable if a person did report such a sense of almost like I can't almost imagine life without the sense of that kind of dimensionality to it. It would be understandable. They may have some work to do, but it would potentially be understandable. So such a different sense of existence, such a different sense of the cosmos, of the dimensionality of being that comes with this. And we, as I said, assimilate that, incorporate that into our being in addition to the usual sense of consciousness. It doesn't then replace it 100% of the time. It just becomes available sometimes. It's completely other sense of consciousness, it's completely other dimension. But our usual sense is still available. And the usual sense of consciousness is it's mine and it's somehow in here or usually in here in the head. And from here in my head it's somehow sensing out and it's associated with this materiality, meaning this physical matter, this physical organism. That's the usual agreed upon idea, but also sense of consciousness in our culture. So that's still available, but other senses become available as well. It's not the case that this infinite consciousness is the ultimate nature of consciousness. It's not. And even just labeling it as the sixth genre would strongly suggest that it can't be. Nor is it ultimately the true nature of mind, nature of awareness, nature of consciousness, nor is the vastness of awareness. So neither of these are the true or ultimate nature of awareness or consciousness. They're not the final truth regarding awareness, regarding consciousness. Also I don't think they really, such an experience doesn't really prove the possibility of a consciousness let's say without or not contained by matter. So that's the experience, consciousness is an immaterial realm. And now in the immaterial realms, Arupa Janas, Arupa Ayatanas, and there's just this infinite consciousness sufficient unto itself and the experience would seem to suggest is that here is a consciousness without being contained in matter. To me it doesn't prove that. So then there's a whole question of epistemology from meditation experiences and what we can deduce from a certain meditative opening. I don't think it proves that. We would need more convincing other kinds of experience, other phenomena, other things to happen to be more convincing that there's a possibility of consciousness without being contained or associated with matter. But still, again how are we to regard all this? I think there's value to say here now we're opening to deep provisional truths. They're deeper truths but they're still provisional. So in this we can talk about almost like a scale of relative truth if you like. Deeper truths still provisional. Provisional truths, experiences, openings, insights, what's the Buddha's words? Perception, attainments. And he talks about them in a scale of perception attainments. The attainment, the ability, the achievement to perceive this or that as a level of truth if you like it but still a provisional truth, not a final, not an ultimate truth. So that feels to me really, really important. How do we get there? How does such a place, how does such a realm, how does such a dimension of existence, of being open up for us? So there's a number of possibilities. One is simply as usual just hanging out in the previous Jhana in which get the realm of infinite space, just hanging out there, really getting into it, revisiting over and over, hanging out, hanging out and it will naturally mature. It naturally matures at a certain point from the previous Jhana. That would be a very normal occurrence. I think I very briefly mentioned this earlier in the treat though. I think, although I know one teacher disagrees with me and one teacher who agrees, I think the order of ease of access through these Arupa Jhanas, much as for some the order of ease of access through the Arupa Jhanas is individually variable. So I feel for me, I felt it was easier to access, for example, to learn this infinite consciousness than the infinite space. Other people might be the other way around or something. But I think there's individual variation here. So one teacher I had insisted on doing them in their numerical order and another teacher who was much less pedantic about that, less emphatic about that. But I would agree. I think there's individual variations in tendency there. But one way, as I said, is just hanging out in the realm of infinite space and just really, really getting into it. When the fruit is ripe, it ripens, it matures. And a second possibility is to be in the realm of infinite space, to hang out there and then at some point when it's steady, when you're really into it, when it's established, when you've got some mastery, then begin becoming aware of the awareness there in that state, in that space. So it's just a subtle shift of the attention and of the intention to pick up on that subtle sense of awareness that we experimented with earlier today, but within the realm of infinite space. So that would be a very straightforward way of going about it if it needs a little nudging. Third possibility is any jhana, any jhana, well, any of jhana is up to now, let's say, it's better, easier to say, or even a normal state of consciousness, a non-jhanic state of consciousness. And actually just what we did earlier, can you get a sense? If it's a jhanic state of awareness, the object of the consciousness at any time will be the primary nimitta. If it's a non-jhanic state of awareness, it could be any smell, taste, touch, sound, something that's quite steady though. You don't want something flickering too much, something quite steady, it's probably easier if something's quite steady. So something you can look at and it's not going to disappear on you, or a sound that's continuous. I pick the heating and not, well, there are no birds right now, but pick the heating, it's more of a constant thing. So normal consciousness with a normal sense object, or any jhanic consciousness with a consciousness of the primary nimitta, and then noticing, tuning to, and focusing in on that sense of knowing, that sense of consciousness. So in other words, this realm of infinite consciousness can be approached not from the fifth jhana, not even from the fourth, third, second, first, can be approached from normal consciousness. It's just a matter of tuning, noticing, tuning, and then amplifying that very sense of consciousness, and then it can begin to open up and open up. So that's one way as well. Fourth way is obviously related to that, but I mentioned it, I think yesterday, I can't remember, is, and the Buddha says it somewhere or other, is to, he kind of classifies the Arupa jhanas, the Arupa Ayatanas, as if you like, perspectives on the fourth jhana. So it's really that there are not eight jhanas, but four jhanas, and the fourth one has five variations, the fourth jhana, and then the four Arupa jhanas. And so somewhere or other in the Pali Kannada, I'm pretty sure the Buddha frames it like that. And already we said in his description, what he emphasized in his description of the fourth jhana was the pure awareness, the body wrapped in pure awareness, or he sometimes says pure mindfulness. So it's right there in the fourth jhana, and if I pick up on that, pick up on the sense of presence, the sense of consciousness, of pure mindfulness, pure awareness, right there in the fourth jhana, the body has become that, that will open up into the infinite consciousness. Fifth, there's insight ways of looking that will open up the infinite consciousness, but they're actually the same as what opens up infinite space. In other words, the same ones might take you to either space, either the infinite space or the infinite consciousness. We mentioned them yesterday. And lastly, as always, with experience, with enough familiarity, enough in and out, enough part of the whole deal with mastery is eventually we can access these realms or this particular realm just by subtle intention, just by remembering it, remembering that realm, remembering our experience of it. And that opens the doors, opens the doors to this divine awareness, this God's mind. Again, I don't think there's any need to push or stretch it to infinity. It's more whichever way you go, I don't think that's so necessary. It should, I think it will, but it should automatically just expand that way. Especially because there's nothing else in consciousness, there's nothing in the way. There's nothing but infinite consciousness. And again, that could be a little tincture that if it's not quite stable yet and you're working to consolidate, you can just drop in there, nothing but infinite consciousness. That kind of primes, it's very, very subtle. It's not like a big thing. This is an alchemical tincture one's putting into the space just to very gently direct and guide the mind and support that opening out. So it should go, it probably will go automatically because there's nothing in the way really, there's nothing to limit it. Sometimes you just need to relax into it. So it's strange, it is a very intense state, but there might be, as you work with it, there might be times when actually it's more relaxation is needed. And other times it's more like really honing in with the intensity on that focus, on the consciousness, on the consciousness of consciousness. So one can just let it expand. This leaning forward business that I mentioned to you can happen, start happening actually sometimes in the third Jhana, but certainly in the fourth and later. This more relaxed approach may help with that because sometimes the leaning forward is, again, in the usual, not just intellectual construal, but sense of attention, placing its object, its mental object in front, and then just a little bit of trying we end up leaning forward because just a little bit of effort we're aiming in front of ourselves. But the more relaxed approach can open it up more evenly. So it may help with that leaning forward issue. A lot depends on how you access this infinite consciousness because, yeah, if you're coming from infinite space, there's sort of nothing there to prevent it becoming infinite. It's already infinite, so it just kind of flips to a consciousness. If you're coming from, let's say, just a normal consciousness, then you're focusing, you're noticing the sense of consciousness, you're noticing the awareness of awareness, you're tuning to that and amplifying it, then it may well be that other objects come in and out of the awareness as you're trying to do that. And either you just say really, really with the sense of knowing, really, really with the sense of consciousness, or you somehow see, sense the other objects as consciousness. Okay, again, the Buddha talks about escape, as we said, nisara-nam. And again, I've still forgotten to look up the word, but he talks about what's often in English translated as releases of awareness. So the different jhanas and then particularly the formless are releases of awareness. So again, it's a realm, we're talking about a realm here completely free, completely free from, completely transcending the hassle and the reach, completely free from and transcending the hassle and the reach of material perceptions. Sometimes the Buddha calls the formless realms the peaceful liberations. So that's a synonym, the peaceful liberations. And then there's passages where he talks about fully liberated beings, arahants, liberated in one way or liberated in two ways. And an arahant fully liberated being liberated in one way is just someone who's gotten rid of, exterminated, expunged, all greed, hatred, and delusion. They've ended their chelaces. An arahant liberated in two ways is someone who also has access to these formless realms. And the Buddha has this lovely passage, they remain touching with their body the peaceful liberations. So their sense of, again, their whole sense of existence has touching with their body something that's beyond the body and immaterial. They remain in the world touching with their body the peaceful liberations. And other arahants, other fully enlightened beings, don't know these realms. They haven't developed them. They're not necessary. So there's difference. But the very, again, experientially the very sense of release, of beyond, of realms and beyond, that very sense can help maintain, again, if you're working in this space, in this realm, and it's kind of just working to really settle it at any one time, then the very sense of release and beyondness and escape and release can be part of what helps consolidate it in that moment. But I need to enjoy that. In other words, the very sense of this transcendence of it, the beyondness, the release of it, they're slightly different things because release is I am released or this is released. Beyondness transcendence is there is that. But the enjoyment of that, the subtle enjoyment of that is, again, also part of the binding glue, the consolidating of moisture, liquid of the experience. So again, such an opening, such a perception, such a revelation relativizes this world, the world that we all agree on, this world of material forms, of things, of beings, et cetera. Opening to that relativizes this world. It takes its place in a series of worlds, of realms. It's not just there is this world and nothing else. And then it relativizes our relationship with this world, and that could happen in different ways. It could, as we said before, become problem to me, to my way of thinking, could become problematically dualistic. It can certainly become dualistic to some people's thinking. It's rarer and rarer these days, but to some people's thinking dualism is not a problem at all. This is, all this is samsara. This is not worth much. We want out. We want not to be reborn. I think traditionally the thrust of Pali Canon teachings is much, much less common these days. So for some people, that kind of dualism is not at all a problem. I think it can be dangerous, that kind of dualism, because then how am I regarding this world? Am I caring for it? Do I love it? What's my duty to this world and others in it? What's my relationship? Have I become, has it become problematically dualistic? Do you understand what I mean by this? So it could, for some people that's not a problem. I think there's a danger and a problem there in the way that I would see the whole movement of the dharma. There's much less so, much less risk of being problematically dualistic if, again, same principles as before. If we let the after effects of perception open up, if we really explore them, they become, my way of, I want to emphasize in teaching all this, as I said, the after effects on perception are as significant as the pure jhanic experiences themselves. Why? Only because of this dualism thing, partly because it's that that really changes or, those after effects on perception have a big impact in our sense of this world. So if I have the after effect on perception, the stone has consciousness and there's divinity radiating from everywhere, this kind of divinity radiating from everywhere, everything is that, then the dualism, as we've discussed before, gets evened out. So that's one important, important reason. Second kind of level of approach in targeting or in rehabilitating any tendency towards problematic dualism is, again, understanding the dependent arising and therefore the emptiness of perception, everything that I talked about the other day. This experience of the world that seven plus billion people agree upon, this experience of infinite consciousness, this experience of a subtle, subtle realm world, this experience of infinite space, whatever it is, they're all dependent arising. They all arise dependent on certain ways of looking. This world and that, this realm and that are perceptions arising dependent on different ways of looking. And understanding that in the most powerful way transcends duality and gives us freedom to be dualistic when we want to be dualistic and non-dualistic when we want to be non-dualistic. As I said, there's collapses any duality between non-duality and duality. We're free, free with a range of ways of looking, free to move, free to give all a sense of equal sacredness because we've understood something about the emptiness of it all, the dependent arising it all because we've played with insight ways of looking, we've played with ways of looking enough to open that whole understanding out. The Buddha also talks about these states and characterizes them as they're a kind of equanimity and certainly they are very equanimous. Just the very, as I said, they're completely unperturbed, completely undisturbed. In that sense, they're really equanimous. There's no push-pull towards anything, any other objects there, let's say. Actually, that's not quite true, but it's a state of very deep equanimity. So certainly they're very calm and they're very focused. But it's also true, I think, that again with experience there might be secondary background emotions. So yes, equanimous, yes, calm and all that. But somehow it might be that in the background one is jumping for joy at the same time. There's wonder potentially, love, peace, ecstasy. All these can be kind of background experiences, I would say, and naturally so, rightly so. And we already mentioned release and freedom. Just like the infinite space, I would really recommend practicing these with eyes open, practicing this realm as well, opening to this realm with eyes open, definitely. Again, looking at the sky or the space and letting that expand. Maybe it goes to infinite space first and then it flips. Maybe you're just beginning to get the sense of consciousness in that much bigger visual space or kinesthetic space or not. So in other words, as we described, with a much smaller sense, not with the sky, not with the space, just with any object. Like the infinite space, profound sense and profoundly impacting sense of oneness, mystical, cosmic oneness, almost overwhelming in the perception of it that emerges both in the jhana, in the pure jhanic experience and in the after effect on perception. And again, this is why so much emphasized the after effects on perception, really taking that time off the cushion in a much more relaxed way, walking around, cup of tea, whatever it is and noticing the effects after a formal practice on perception. How is now, right now, what's happened to my perception of self, of world, of consciousness, of whatever it is, of things, of materiality, all that. I'm really noticing that because that does something very profound. The oneness can be in the jhana or in the after effect on perception. It's a oneness. Yesterday we said the primary oneness that comes with the infinite space is a oneness of materiality, of material substance. We are all star stuff. We are all the same big bang. We are really one matter, our bodies, etc. This in contrast is a oneness of consciousness. It's a oneness of awareness. So one can have the sense that there's not really, there's the appearance of separate awarenesses, separate consciousness, but actually at another level there's one. There's one divine consciousness of which we are part or in which we partake. When you get to soul making dharma, there are important variants of this. Then it actually gets significantly different. I've noticed when I'm teaching soul making dharma and I say something about participating in God's mind, sometimes people write to me and they, from what I read, from what they're saying it sounds like they're relating or they're hearing what I said in a soul making dharma context. They're hearing this, this oneness of awareness. There's actually something different in a soul making dharma. There are more variants and more subtlety and more allowances for the individual particularity. God's awareness needs my awareness, my particular awareness, my particular dukkha, my particular ways that my mind works and yours, your particularities, your foibles, your struggles. That's different than it's just there is one awareness, a simple, pure, clean awareness that somehow we will participate in. So there's significant differences there, but this is not soul making treatment just for those of you who are interested. The oneness technically, I suppose, again is a secondary nimitta. The primary nimitta is the consciousness. The oneness, I mean in a way they'll get completely fused at times, of course, but technically it's a secondary nimitta. We should focus primarily, as always, on primarily, most of the time, on the consciousness. The oneness will come. It will also arise just later, just naturally in the after effects of perception. You can trust that. So you don't even know, in some ways you could say perhaps one of the most significant and most impactful and most potent and most transformative perceptions and knowings and digestions here is the very sense of oneness. Also we don't need to, probably most people don't need to go looking for it. You can trust that it will arise and it will do its work. Of course there are always exceptions, but I would say that. So again, same deal with mastery. All the little tricks of the trade and the little things that we play, same deal. Going for walks and all that. And just to emphasize, I don't know how all this sounds, but it's really just a matter of training. So when we talked yesterday about the fifth genre, infinite space, or even today, yesterday with the infinite space we said looking at an object that we would usually sense in the very looking at. So even though I'm not touching it, my sense in the looking is of solidity. That would be the normal sense of it. And then seeing and sensing physical objects, material objects as space, seeing and sensing them as not solid and staying with that. So getting that sense and then staying with that and infinite space can open up from that. What's basically, if I sustain it, what's basically then a training of the different elements here. Can I flip, so I can see what I usually sense as solid. Can I flip the perception so that I sense it as space, as not solid. And then can I sustain that? And then can I allow that to open? These are all just elements of a training. Just what is it? Training the perception of space. Training the perception of space. Space is not something that we usually pay attention to. Usually we're basically addicted or imprisoned or habitually we pay attention to objects in space. Even if an architect or something talks about paying attention to space, it's not quite the same thing. What they really mean is a geometry that has shapes in space. That actual space itself is not something that human beings habitually pay attention to. So we're training a perception, training an ability of what's a more refined perception. But the point I want to make is it's all training. It's training of perceptions and the training has slightly different elements in it. How many suttas are there where the Buddha says, and he's describing some meditation and describing a monk doing this, thus he trains himself. And then a little bit of thus he trains himself. Thus he trains himself. It's just training. What that means is it's possible, it's available. So again even the thing we did earlier today, can you get a sense of the awareness of awareness? Can you become aware of awareness in the moment, in the moment? And then can you sustain that? And can you focus in on it? And can you let it amplify? And then can you let that expand? It's all training. It's just training. And what that means to me, it's an important word because it means it's totally possible. It's totally available. And I don't know how it sounds, but we're really talking about something majestic in its grandeur, unfathomable in its beauty and wonder and depth and sublimity and dimensionality and divinity. But also that in another sense or at the very same time is just a training. Yes, it's very rare and even rare as I said in the vastness of awareness, but it's just a training. It's rare just because people have not been taught or don't sustain their journey of working towards it, playing towards it. So it's possible and available if we get our relationship with desire right. All this. And I keep coming back to that. I can talk about blah, blah, blah, blah, blah and all this great sounding stuff. But if the relationship with desire isn't, if I don't understand myself in relationship to desire, I don't understand what I'm bringing in or what is brought into my desires at different times and how I relate to that, not just in this moment, but over time, sustain in a sustained way for a retreat, but also for years, months and years. If it's possible available, if I have that fundamental inquiry and understanding and right relationship with desire, and I think if I bring a kind of intelligence to my working and playing and by intelligence, I don't mean scholarship. I said that before, nor do I mean something really intellectual. I don't mean that at all. I mean everything we've emphasized, the flexibility, the responsiveness, the attunement, the coherent conceptual framework of what am I doing and why and where is it going and how does this fit into where I'm going? Because that bigger picture, conceptual framework, should guide me in my momentary choices and momentary emphases. So if that's a skew or I haven't kind of got a coherent one or it doesn't make sense, or if I'm trying to work towards this genre, but actually I'm laboring under the umbrella of a conceptual framework that doesn't really support it or emphasizes an aspect like how long can I stay on one object? We've talked about this before. I'm emphasizing something that's actually just going to capsize the boat and not let this boat deliver me to where I want to go. So if there's the right relationship with desire and inquiry into that in the open, that's the hard thing. That's not an easy thing. That's a big ask and it's more fundamental. If there's this intelligent, what I mean by intelligent work and play, then these things are really possible and available and they're just trainings. They're just trainings. So last thing about desire, and someone wrote a note, a couple of people wrote a note in fact. So again, it's just a small thing for people who are already familiar with soul making Dharma just very briefly, and we talked about the importance and absolute necessity of having a helpful view of the self on the path, a helpful view of the practitioner self. In soul making Dharma, we talk about fantasies of the path, fantasies of the self on the path, and I've talked about that several times in other soul making retreats over the last years. I can't remember where, but it's there. A couple of people were asking, yeah, but okay, but when you're on a Jhana retreat, for example, let's say it's an emptiness retreat, or let's say it's a meta retreat, or it's a themed retreat, and it's not a soul making themed retreat, how do I relate to this whole idea of fantasy? How can I work with the whole idea of fantasy? Because I'm supposed to be doing Jhana practice, I'm supposed to be an emptiness practice, or whatever it is. So a fantasy is something, as I said, that's almost, I use it as a word, something in the background, something in the background. It's a background kind of imaginal narrative, if you like, or semi-narrative, but it in fact has an eternality to it, but it's in a narrative appearance, if you like, but it's in the background. What can happen, or what we can do sometimes is bring that, when we notice that fantasy, we can bring it into the foreground and work on it with our imaginal practice. In other words, what was fantasy in the background becomes image in the foreground, and then we work and play with that image. And of course it might be an image of myself, so that's what we're working with. So a glimpse of fantasy in the corner of my eye, when things are going really well, when I'm into practice, when I'm inspired, a glimpse of the fantasy, and then if I want, I can bring that to the foreground and work on it in a sort of conscious, deliberate, imaginal practice. But then, once you've done that, it can go to the background again. So that's one way of doing it, or you might find there's no fantasy, actually, there's just dukkha. I'm just stuck here. I just am hitting my head against a brick wall, I feel completely contracted or imprisoned or whatever it is, there is no fantasy, or what there is is a self-view that's not an imaginal fantasy, it's an impoverishment, and it's a reified self-view that's painful. Then as I said yesterday, then what I have to do is I have to go through that dukkha. I have to go right to the middle of the dukkha and feel the dukkha of it, and feel the pain of it, and I have to hold it in certain ways. I cannot approach it just with simple mindfulness, simple mindfulness will drain the self out and drain the story out. Very useful at times, but here we want a certain kind of crucible, a certain kind of holding which allows the self to be there and the dukkha and the story, but allows them to alchemically reconfigure or arise differently in a much more helpful way. So through the dukkha and through the very heat of the dukkha and the material of the dukkha in that crucible, if I hold it right in my imaginal practice, then an image of the self and an image of the path will arise. Then that can go to the background. If this is all in the context of a Jhana Retri or an emptiness retreat or a metra retreat and not a soul-making retreat, it can go to the background. In other words, we only use these fantasies, we only bring them to the foreground as much and when they are needed. Otherwise they can stay in the background. From the background, they quietly but powerfully do their work in their subtle, half-hidden, almost subliminal way from the background. So you bring it forward or you concentrate on your dukkha and allow the image to become primary only when you need it. A bit like using insight ways of looking on a Jhana retreat, if an insight way of looking is not your base or springboard practice, for some people it is and that's fine, they're doing that all the time. For other people, it's almost last in the list of things to do when something feels stuck. I try this, I try imagining, I try breathing through, I try this and this and this, I try etc. Last on the list maybe is an insight way of looking but I'm just taking something else, bringing it into primacy for a certain time for the sake of lubricating and opening up the Jhana path now on this retreat where there's an intention and an intention to stay constant with my intention and on a certain path. I bring it and when it does its work I can let it go again, unless it's my base practice. So we only use it when we've tried everything else which hasn't helped. Does that make sense? So let's sit quietly for a bit. Okay........

 Okay, so what I wanted to talk about today is the fifth jhana. Actually, the Buddha never calls it the fifth jhana to my knowledge. He calls them the first, second, third, fourth, and then he calls them the realm of this, the realm of that. And the fifth jhana is the realm of infinite space. So I don't know how it is for you listening to, listening, hearing about things that you may not have experienced yet. For some people it's interesting. For some people it's super exciting and they want to jump straight there. For some people it's just, what's that got to do with me? And something turns off a little bit. For some people the inner critic kicks in, or I'm not there yet. So it's always interesting, I've found over the years, talking about, or possibly talking about things and areas and experiences and openings and insights where it's often the case that many or some of the people I'm talking to are not there yet, and how that lands. And I've noticed over the years when we're talking about something, one person is totally transfixed and bewitched and enchanted and another person is sort of, looking at them and everything. But again, this is for you, and it's for future yous, of which there are actually an infinite amount for each of you, and it's for other beings elsewhere now and in the future. So the realm of infinite space, I don't know, how does that sound? What's that? Cool, yeah. Let's hear, what's that? Big, yeah. Let's hear what the, not a place where you want to lose your keys. Let's see what the Buddha has to say about that. The practitioner is practicing and has reached a certain place in this very contrived exposition, the stage by stage is a teaching contrivance. So he reaches, they reach a certain stage in their samadhi, and they're sitting there or standing there and walking, whatever, and the thought occurs to him. What if I, with the complete transcendence of perceptions of physical form, I'm going to come back to re-translate that because I don't like that, with the complete transcending of perceptions of physical form, with the disappearance of perceptions of resistance, and not heeding, not attending to perceptions of diversity, realizing space is infinite. What if I then were to enter and remain in the sphere of the infinitude of space? Without jumping at the sphere of the infinitude of space, he enters and remains in the sphere of infinitude and space. He sticks with it, that theme, develops it, pursues it, and establishes himself firmly in it. That's all the Buddha says about it. Actually, no, there's a bit more in other suttas. Suttas that for some reason I very rarely talked about, but I'm very fond of them. That's one translation. I'm not particularly keen on a lot of that. The complete transcending of perceptions of physical form is translated by someone else here, by passing entirely beyond bodily sensations. I'm not entirely happy with that either. The Pali is Rupa Sanyanam Samatikama. It means Samatikama is something that transcends going beyond. Rupa Sanyanam is just Rupa and Sanya, both of which words you want to know. It is the genitive plural of Sanya, which is perception, and Rupa is Rupa. Rupa is an interesting word because it can mean body, and it can also mean form as in a shape of something. I think the least misleading translation here would be something like with the complete transcending of perceptions of materiality. I think that would pinpoint it more easily. With the disappearance of perceptions of resistance, perceptions, so the floor is resistant to me, and that's why I can stand on it. The wall is resistant to me, and that's why I feel it. When I look at the wall, I sense a sense of it will hurt if I run at it with my head first. There's a sense of it blocks something. People, objects block something. Not heeding to perceptions of diversity or manifoldness means not paying attention to the many things that make up the world of materiality. There's the clock, there's the lamp, there's the glass, there's the flowers, there's the shirt, there's the table, there's the person, there's the body, there's the cushion. Not heeding all these separate things, transcending the perception of materiality, and the quieting, the disappearance or the setting down is really the party, the putting down of the perception of resistance. That's another way of saying solidity. Then again without jumping at it, without snatching at it, enters and remains, but then again this stick with it, develop it, pursue it, establish it. That's pretty much all the Buddha says about that. The descriptions get shorter and shorter and tersa and tersa, and we'll come back to another siddha where there's a bit more said about it, but only in terms of how to get there. Then often you get in these translations though, not with the transcending of perceptions of materiality, etc. Thinking space is infinite. It's a strange parley, it's a common but slightly unusual parley construction. I'd prefer something to say like seeing or sensing or perceiving that space is infinite. Perceiving has both a passive aspect, recognizing that space is infinite, but also perceiving, as we've highlighted so much on this retreat, has this kind of active aspect. I actually tune the perception, I play with perception so that the infinitude of space opens up. For me the word perceiving is a little better because it captures both that passive recognition and active playing. I play with my perception so that the sense of infinitude opens up. The first four jhanas are called rupa jhanas. The last four jhanas are called aa-rupa jhanas. r is a negative, so usually it's translated as the rupa jhanas and then the aa-rupa jhanas are translated usually as the formless jhanas. Again, I'm beginning to wonder whether a better translation would be the immaterial jhanas, the immaterial jhanas. Even as I said, the Buddha doesn't actually use the word jhanas, he uses the word ayatana, which is a word in Pali that means something like sphere or realm or base. So I prefer realm, it's a world, it's a realm, it's a realm of existence, ayatana. So these jhanas, 5-8, are really opening up to other realms. We had a glimpse, a taste of that, the beginnings of that in the third and fourth jhanas perhaps, but now we're really clearly in other realms. And this business of realms is quite important because it actually relates, so this whole range of jhanic experiences map neatly and coherently onto a whole cosmology. In Buddhist cosmology, there are three worlds, they talk about three worlds, tiloka in Pali, T3 loka world, tiloka, three worlds or three realms or three, we could say, planes of existence or three levels of the cosmos. There is what we might call the form realm, the realm of rupa. It's sometimes also in the Buddhist cosmology called the desire world, the world of desire, karmaloka. But I want to actually again point, it's the world of materiality, it's the world of the four elements, solidity, liquidity, air, which really means movement and heat, heat and cold. So earth, air, fire, water, it's the world of materiality. This is the world that we all agree on, we might slightly disagree or slightly be more or less informed about what the current thinking in physics is about the nature of the world, but it's the world we all experience, the world of materiality that everyone agrees on. This is one, it's the lowest level, it's the lowest, well actually it's not the lowest because there are other realms, but it's one level of, it's a plane of existence, above which is a world that correlates with the first four jhanas, the rupa jhanas, and this is the world of subtle form. So in each level of the cosmos, see all this kind of gets ignored, oftentimes in modern secular buddhadharma of course because it's just kind of superstitious religious mumbo jumbo belonging to ancient eastern thought, but actually when you start to really go in and out of these jhanic perceptions and move between these different realms really, you start to begin to, well maybe there's something to this. So again, what looks like completely irrelevant abstract and pretty arbitrary metaphysics, you see its direct correlation with meditative experience. But this, the world of the four jhanas, or the plane of the four jhanas, that is the world of subtle form, the rupa jhanas. Again I would better say subtle materiality, and if we think about what's happening to the sense, the perception of the materiality of the body, here I see it normal consciousness, solid, solid bone, solid flesh, etc. That's my body, organs, all the rest of it. Even in the first jhana, the body becomes, in this cosmos, it's much more subtle, it's more refined, the perception of the materiality of the body. It's subtle materiality. And yesterday we were talking about the energy body as something that kind of spans physical and mental. And that we would put into the category of subtle materiality. That's what this kind of cosmology and this kind of thinking also in relation to energy body don't just exist in Buddhism, they also exist in, for instance, Islamic mysticism, probably some strands of Jewish Kabbalah, a bit more complicated in Christian mysticism, but maybe there. Energy body or subtle body belongs to that realm of, that middle realm of subtle materiality, and then you get the immaterial realm. In Christianity and also in Islam, and maybe in Jews, there's also different levels of angels, and also in Buddhism, different levels of devas and gods inhabit each realm. So usually translated as formless, but immaterial may be better. How do we get there? How does this open up? Well, probably, probably, in most cases, it's going to be, it's going to first open up like in a convincing and persuasive and deeply impactful way from the fourth Jhana, probably at first. And then the fourth Jhana, really, a sense of it being really deep and really well established. And then one of the things you can do, once that fourth Jhana is really established, then you can start almost feeling into the space of the energy body again with a view, with feeling for the sense of the body space. And what you sense there is a lack of solidity, a complete lack of solidity as if it's just empty space. And actually, that goes with a subtle well-being. So you could either tune into the, here I am in the fourth Jhana, it's not Piti, it's not Sukha, it's something much more subtle, but there is a well-being there, despite this neither pleasure nor pain language. There is a well-being, but it's the well-being, that kind of well-being is the well-being of non-solidity, of non-materiality. It's almost like you feel as if you could just put your hand right through this space here. That feeling right there in this location, in the energy body space, in the energy body region, the kinesthetic sense of that, of that lack of solidity and that the well-being that goes with the absence of solidity and materiality is very refined. Again, if we think about the five Jhanas, you've got, or five Jhanas plus normal consciousness, normal consciousness, it's just solid, it's not very refined at all. First Jhana more refined, second Jhana more refined, we've said this before, third, fourth. By the time you get to the fifth, fourth is very refined, by the time you get to the fifth, it's refined out all of any sense of solidity. There's not even a sense of a kind of energetic substance or the stillness or whatever, it's kind of gone. Do you understand? It's just an extension of the same thing, the energy body sense of refinement. To really sense that, to really feel into it, inhabit it and stay with that, stay with that very sense of the well-being that comes from the absence of solidity and really focus on that. This is one approach. One might notice, actually there's no edges. This very absence of solidity has no edges. It's edgeless. Or one might notice that any edges that maybe habitually creep in, the assumption or even an imagination of edges that might creep in subtly into the mind, they just keep dissolving. The mind just sees through them, so they just become space. In the Visuddhi Maga, which is this commentary that I mentioned a couple of times from Sri Lanka, there is a technique where you use little discs. They're called kasinas and you focus on, they can be different colors. That's one of the meditative techniques that's explained a lot and emphasized a lot in the Visuddhi Maga. From that little technique, then you deliberately try imagining a bigger and bigger disc until it's infinite. This way of doing it, I've talked about, I don't think you need to stretch anything. Just this absence that you're feeling, the kinesthetic sense of absence, you don't need to stretch anything. You don't need to push anything outwards or make an effort, kind of stretching space to infinity. Just hanging out there, after a while you just realize it just goes on forever. There's no end to this. If there are, as I said, if there are edges, they just keep dissolving. You just keep seeing through them. For many people, they have an internal visual imagination and there's literally the seeing of space. That can be really helpful, really, really helpful. There's a seeing of this infinitude of space. We really also want to get a kinesthetic sense involved as well. It can feel as if one was falling through space. I think it came up partly in the Q&A really early in the treat, can feel like they've just taken the floor away and it's as if there's just nothing underneath me at all and nothing above. The visual and kinesthetic sense can very much work together and that will really help kind of empower the whole thing and consolidate it. There is a delight in this. There is something actually to enjoy. Technically, you're supposed to be beyond pleasure and pain and all that, but actually there's, I think, a great delight in this very absence of resistance that the Buddha is talking about. The very sense of just falling through space or potentially being able to fall through space, nothing there, nothing at all in the way, nothing at all that one could bang into or that would obstruct in any way. That enjoying is actually quite an important element. We'll come back to that. Really what one's doing is really staying focused on the space, on the total absence of solidity, on the solidity or resistance and not really attending to anything else that comes up in the mind or anything else that one might perceive. It's the non attending to perceptions of diversity. You keep doing that and the thing starts to get bigger but also really, really consolidated. Sometimes people want to worry about, well, how big is it? I've got a sense of space. It's definitely not solid, but how big is it? Is it infinite yet? I don't think we need to worry about that. It's the same thing, I don't need to worry about pushing it. It's more just one sense that there aren't edges. The Pali word in the suttas is ananta, which literally means without end or without a boundary, without edge. It's that absence of boundaries and one just keeps any sense of wherever they could be. They just disappear and the mind falls through them. They just disappear. Then the sense just opens out, opens out. Keeping with the sense of space allows the expansion. Sometimes as I mentioned already, there's a kind of level of the fourth jhana, which we could say is a slightly deeper level, like the third jhana, where it opens up wider. But in the third and fourth jhana, we want to keep the attention more in the energy body space, but there's a sense of a wider realm. It could go from there, one starts giving one's attention to the wider realm rather than just keeping the energy with the energy body. Essentially, it's the same thing and you have to see what works better for you. As usual, damn burst at first perhaps and it just goes there effortless, etc. It might be in time and with enough experience in and out, in and out. Sometimes one's practicing this and body sensations start to come back or even physical pain starts to come back. Either one then needs to go back to a lower jhana, probably the fourth jhana, or if you have more experience, you could go to a higher jhana actually. Let's say you already know the sixth or the seventh. Here I am trying to get into the fifth in this session, but it keeps something in the body, keeps returning, could go back to the fourth or could go to the sixth or seventh if I know them and then come back. Those visitations will really help everything to become less solid again and then one can stay more in the fifth jhana. Another option might be that one could, here I am, pain is starting to reemerge in the body or just body sensations and one can almost focus in between the regions of pain. Just look at the gaps, the space in between and eventually those will open up and the space will reestablish itself. But really I think the best foundation is probably a really strong sense of stillness from the fourth jhana, really refined and pristine, pure sense of stillness from the fourth jhana. And then if one attempts the fifth jhana then and it's not steady, one can always return to the fourth jhana so that he can make it kind of a home base in many different ways. So it's tricky, like I said, a lot of what I say will have exceptions but generally speaking that the fourth jhana wants to be really quite mature before the fifth can be really established. Sometimes there are suttas, I couldn't find them, but there are suttas where the Buddha talks about, if I remember, it's almost like, okay there are four jhanas and then there are four immaterial realms and what they really are are perspectives on the fourth jhana. They're ways of looking at what's happening in the fourth jhana, particularly ways of looking at what's happening to the sense of the body. So that the immaterial realms are different ways of sensing or different ways of looking at the body sense in the fourth jhana. So in a way, infinite space as a realm is already there in the fourth jhana. If I look at the fourth jhana and if I look at the sense of the body in a certain way and I just see it as space, it's already there. There's already so little solidity and I just look at it and sense the body as space. And this one matches more of the Buddha's descriptions, if I sense the body space, what did the Buddha say about the fourth jhana? The analogy was a purified bright awareness, a purified mindfulness. That's what was pervading. It wasn't piti, it wasn't sukhar, it was a purified bright awareness that was pervading the body. So that one's already hinting at the beginnings of the sixth jhana. I look at the body and I see it as awareness. I'm paying attention to it as the very awareness there and that will take me to the sixth jhana, etc. Or nothing or whatever. For most people, I think I've never done a statistical analysis but I think for most people this jhana is perceived as pitch black. So you could have a very luminous white, bright white fourth jhana but for most people I think the fifth jhana will be black but it doesn't really matter, that's a very secondary thing. I think one of the lovely things about this realm is that you can actually practice it with the eyes open. And this is something I would really, really recommend in addition to the usual eyes shut ways of working. Sitting standing, looking at the sky for instance, looking at space, getting a sense of the space, feeling that space, the space of the sky, the space there in nature, feeling it with the body, feeling it kinesthetically as well. And again, realizing it's boundless, it's ananta, it doesn't have boundaries. So when I was learning this, we had a heat wave and I think it was really hot from something like March until October or something and I was on retreat the whole time and I would just stand in the fields and the less busy lanes and just be staring at the sky much to the amusement probably of the neighbors. But that's one way of practicing and it's very, very potent, very just as potent, eyes open looking and getting a real feel for the space. The body and the mind become kind of one with boundless space. That's what we're trying to again dissolve the body and dissolve the mind in this boundless space. It's a very exhilaration is perhaps a really accurate word. There's really a sense of wow. It's almost dramatic in that dissolution, in that infinitude, in that disappearance of body and solidity where again moving in that direction. It's the same thing with sassy. It's the A, absorb is a direction, dissolving body and mind, absorbing into it, being space, I used to say to myself, being space. I've become space, but it's a direction. However absorbed we are, we can always be more absorbed. With this kind of opening, there is or there should be a very strong sense of cosmic oneness, mystical cosmic oneness that emerges with the opening to this realm. Both in the Jhana certainly because one has become space. There's nothing but space. The whole cosmos is just space. And also in the after effects on perception. As I mentioned yesterday, to me, the after effects on perception become really important at this level, the formless Jhana's. They're all really powerful, they're potentially very potent. So there's a strong sense of cosmic oneness and again that does something to the heart, to the soul, to the sense of existence, to all of that. I'll return to that later, come back to the oneness bit later. There's also in this state, there's also what the Buddha calls a sense of release. I meant to look up the Pali, I can't remember, but the Buddha talks about a release. Now all Jhana's are releases. They're releases from the hindrances. Certainly the first four Jhana's are releases from sense desires and the irritation or aversions to sensual impacts. But here we have a different kind of release. We're released from the perceptions of materiality and solidity. And that really is felt as a release. That release, that sense of release is what I would call a secondary nimitta. The primary nimitta here is space and it's endless space, just nothing solid there, just nothing, nothing, nothing solid there. That's the primary nimitta. A secondary nimitta, which again, like we've talked about before with the love or other secondary nimitta, you can lean into and emphasize and explore more at times. But probably overall, if you want the whole journey to deepen, it needs to remain secondary. But it's still really important to sense the release here. And that's what I would call a secondary nimitta. It's a tremendous release to be released. This is one of those things, stop a person on the street and ask them if they feel imprisoned by materiality and solidity. And it's like, you need to get out more or whatever they would say. There are releases that we don't realize are releases until we, sorry, there are imprisonments that we don't realize are imprisonments until we've gone beyond them. That's why I prefer to keep the word dukkha in the Pali because it's talking about subtle things that we have no sense of them as dukkha at all. We wouldn't list them on our list of what's dukkha. But the release from perceptions of materiality and solidity really is a, there's a freedom there. So that's also secondary nimitta, they're completely connected, release, freedom, secondary nimitta, very exhilarating. There's joy as well, perhaps as a secondary nimitta at times. And I would say wonder and awe, but these are all secondary. The sense of infinity itself is going to affect, or again, it can if we let it, if we don't get in the way, if we're not entrenched in certain views which erect walls of conception and view that are not demolishable. If we actually let it, then the sense of infinity and the sense of release from materiality and this whole perception, the cosmic oneness, they really affect the being deeply, affect the sense of existence, the whole relationship with death, the self and the self's dying. This taste of infinity, this, it's more than a taste, this immersion in, this dissolution in infinity. And like I said, all the jhanas really have their impact or part of their impact, a strand of their impact is in lessening attachment. So here as well. Another secondary nimitta will be love, metta, let's say metta more accurately, metta. Why? All this oneness and non-heeding to perceptions of diversity, metta is unconditional love. The more oneness, the more natural there is, naturally there is metta. And when I'm not heeding diversity and not attending to perceptions of diversity, then everything is, everyone is equally deserving of metta and the metta flows to all equally. It's when I prefer this bit of diversity to that bit of diversity. That's when the metta becomes conditional and not so pure. The metta is there as a secondary nimitta, again, something we can certainly lean into at times or in the after effects on perception. It might be in those after effects, you might have a lot of different after effects, so that might be a very strong one. Just walking around after this kind of experience and there's a tremendous metta and one may really lean into that. I'm not so much concentrating on the space sense or the infinity, it's just the metta now, the profound sort of ocean of it. Just a small point here that may not be needed anymore, but I remember years ago it was commonly taught that metta and karuna and metta and karuna mudita, loving kindness, compassion and appreciative joy were good objects for jhana practice, but they only went as far as the third jhana, that's as far as you could take them. Has anyone heard that? It's from the Visuddhimagga, the Buddha never said that. In the Pali Canon, the Buddha says metta can take you to the fourth and fifth jhanas, etc. He goes more. Again, it's a strange historical thing that has happened with the Visuddhimagga and it gets a lot of stuff in there, it gets unquestioned for some reason even though the Buddha is saying something quite different. A little bit relating to what Derek asked yesterday, he says, karuna delivers to the fifth jhana and for one who has not penetrated to fourth jhana, he says, but for one who has not penetrated to further release. In other words, if you know the sixth or seventh, your karuna, your compassion practice could take you to the sixth. There's a couple of interesting things here to point out. First is, just a small point in terms of karuna, that if karuna is taking you to the second or the third jhana, karuna means compassion, right? That's your meditation. That means compassion is a happy state, right? Sometimes people have an idea that compassion is not a happy state, but actually it's very clear what the Buddha meant by compassion is a happy state, a state where there's a lot of happiness in it. That's a small point. The other thing, and I throw this out for you to explore or whoever to explore when you want, is that at some point with all this, if you really get into it, you can start experimenting with different kind of cocktails, what I call cocktails. It means exactly this. For instance, mixing infinite consciousness, the sixth jhana, the realm of infinite consciousness with let's say compassion. You're starting to color space or put two things together that are ordinarily not thought of together and you've got like mixing cocktails. What you read or what you might hear in terms of the categories, and this does this and this does this, you start to get the sense that actually a lot more is possible than you may have read about and all kinds of creativity and playfulness are possible. You can make your own cocktails and give them funny names. After Effects on Perception, I think again, this is so, so important, I think, and so much what touches the heart and makes the difference in one's life, brings the liberation, brings the wonder and brings the change and the opening out of the sense of existence. It's this almost as much as what happens in the meditation. From this, there's kind of two we could pinpoint from the realm of infinite space, two After Effects. One is that all is space. Where's my apple gone? See what she likes? She gives the teacher an apple and she takes it. Anyway, all right, we'll have to... Yeah. All right. This is not as good as an apple, but this is the... You've probably all heard this before. This is the nucleus of an atom. Where are the electrons? How far? Plymouth. Any advance on Plymouth? Johannesburg. Something like that. Anyway, the point is we feel ourselves to live in a world that's very, very solid. What's the world made up of? It's made up of atoms and atom has a nucleus and is orbited by electrons in the classical view that's then completely trashed by quantum physics. The distance between the nucleus and the electrons is something like... Actually, if it's that size, because it's usually an orange, that's why I wanted the apple. With that size, it would actually be somewhere like the moon or somewhere like that. Basically, the idea is most of what we're looking at and feeling and sensing as solid space is actually space. That's one After Effect. The more significant one, I think the one the Buddha puts more influence on. That's still important, that space thing. It's an important perception. The second one has to do with oneness. It's that all sense objects are really one materiality. They're one stuff, one substance. We are star stuff. Everything in this room, everyone in this room, all the atoms that make up everyone and everything in this room probably all came from the same supernova. Supernova is when a star explodes. The physical and chemical processes that happen when a star explodes, it generates more complex atoms which can then make carbon and make other elements that form the world of materiality. All of us and everything on earth probably came, all the atoms came from the same supernova that exploded somewhere or other a long time ago. In a way, we're all one materiality. Then before that, it all came from the big bang, allegedly. We can hear that kind of stuff, but with this kind of perception, the perception of oneness, oneness of materiality, oneness of physical substance, impresses itself on the heart. It's not just, oh, that's not interesting. It really impresses itself on the heart. It's a level of oneness that really starts to touch one's being. It's a mystical oneness, really. Even though we're talking about matter where we have that sense of the mystical, not just connection but oneness with all materiality, the whole earth, each other, bodies, trees, everything. There are, I don't know how many suttas that mention the realm of infinite space. Most of them just say just that little bit what I read to you at the beginning that the Buddha said, which is really two or three lines. There's another one, which I was a big fan of this sutta for a while when I was exploring the relationship of insight and jhana practice. It's a sutta in the Madhjamanakaya, and it's called something like ways to the imperturbable or conducive to the imperturbable. In Jhasa Paaya sutta. Again, we'll go back to what we talked about yesterday. What ways of looking that open up a particular jhana. Here it's not so much that the insight way of looking that one employs or engages or practices is space is infinite. It's rather that what the Buddha teaches that all sensuality and all sense perceptions are... He gives three options, but it's really the third one that we're interested in. He says they're all dukkha. All sensuality and all sense perceptions are dukkha. Then second one he gives all sensuality, all sense perceptions are impermanent. These are again, they're not just like, oh yeah, that's right. I shouldn't be attached like an idea. Then we say, yeah, yeah, it's bad to be attached. They're views, they're insight ways of looking. I have to translate that, agilely, subtly into my way of looking in the moment and keep looking over and over, keep sensing over and over. This is what we mean by an insight way of looking. Not if the Buddha says all sense objects are impermanent, it's like, yeah, okay, that tells me I should live and try and not be attached. It's going to have about zero power in our life. If we engage it as a way of looking, I mean a subtle meditative engagement. This is what I mean by insight way of looking, is something very light in the consciousness as we're looking. We're looking in a particular way. We're sensing, we're relating in a particular way, seeing, sensing in a particular way, impermanent. All these things are dukkha, all of it. Whatever I see, I walk around, I sit, I look at the materiality, I sense the materiality in permanent dukkha. Then it starts to do something. It's not that it starts to do something 20 years later, maybe I'll be a little less attached. It may well have that effect too, but it does something now. This again is what I mean by insight ways of looking. They have their power now. They bring release now. They change the perception now. If I just need to do it over and over and over, I'm training, I'm training, I'm playing with perception over and over. The most significant one here of the three that the Buddha gives is not the dukkha, not the impermanence, but it's all materiality. It's all just the four elements, earth, air, fire, and water. What does that mean? It means perhaps I do my walking meditation or I stand outside or I sit with my eyes open, with my eyes closed. Any sense of any sense object, I'm looking, it's just materiality, it's just materiality. This has to mean something to me. If it doesn't mean something, then it won't work. It has to both mean something, but also in the looking be incredibly light and incredibly agile. I have a big philosophical essay that I'm pondering through and repeating, but pregnant in my just impermanent, impermanent, or it's just materiality, it's just materiality. That one's quite an easy one, I think, but it has to encapsulate something that means something for me about its... Do you understand? Then it has its power. Then it starts to have its power and I need to sustain it. One after one after one after one after a moment, I sustain it. It's a way of looking, an insight way of looking. That insight way of looking can take me to the fifth jhana, the realm of infinite space. Why? Yeah, because you're not attending to diversity. That's one reason, and you're also not... It's all just... There's a... With the impermanent and dukkha, there's also a sense that I'm not interested in this. It's just all materiality, all sense objects, sense perceptions are kind of not... I'm just not interested. There's a letting go of any clinging with regard to materiality and material objects. Both for the reason Nicole said, not attending to diversity, but also this kind of... We'll come back to this. Basically, the Buddha says, this is worthless. This is dukkha. This is Mara's snare. This is a cancer. This is a dark, an arrow. All that's kind of in there. It doesn't need to be so... The Buddha's a little extreme sometimes in his language. It's more just a kind of like, hmm, hmm, nah, nah, nah. Very subtle. We're doing something very, very powerful and this other realm can begin to open up from the insight way of looking. I haven't gone through jhanas one, two, three, four. I've gone through the insight way of looking. There will be in that and in all this, both in the sense of oneness that comes in the after effect on perception, also if you follow that insight way of looking that I just described and the Buddha offered there. There will be in time this disident... Certainly in the moment, but also more long term in my life, more disidentification with the body becomes available. Again, I would say it becomes available rather than just a constant thing because sometimes it's important to identify with the body. Of course it's important, but that view, that relationship with the body of non-identification becomes much more available through the insight way of looking or through the after effect on perception from the jhanic realm. There's just elements of the cosmos, just the material elements of the cosmos. When we're eating, we're just moving elements from there to here and then out again or breathing or whatever. Again, there's a release, there's a beauty in that. If I only ever think of body and physicality like that, to me that's an impoverishment. I miss all kinds of wonderful, beautiful, important things about existence. Do you understand? I think that's really important. That's one way it can happen, but the other way is not with the eyes shut and with the eyes open looking at the sky or looking at space, but actually looking at objects. Especially if you've had a lot of experience going in and out of the realm of infinite space, but also maybe from other meditative experiences, which many of you have already actually already had, where you look at an object and usually as I said, I look at the wall or I look at Nathan or whatever it is and in the looking there's a sense of their solidity. I just somehow sense it as a part of the normal consciousness. Again, I know there's going to be resistance and there's going to be obstruction there. But sometimes, especially if you've done a lot of fifth jhana or other kinds of meditation, there's this other perception available where you look at something and you can kind of see right through it, so to speak. It just doesn't appear solid. You can also train your perception, play with a way of looking where you're seeing and sensing things as space, not as solid. Just look at the table and just get a sense of it, not as solid. One's ability to do that rests on how many, probably how familiar you are with that kind of perception from before. It could come from your previous experience of the realm of infinite space, but it could also come from other kinds of meditative opening because that decrease of solidity is again, it's a kind of unfabricating. And any meditative practice, certainly any kind of classical meditative practice is a practice of unfabricating to some degree. Jhana, seela, ethics, concentration, samadhi, jhana, insight practice, they're all unfabricating to some degree. So that this kind of perception, if you're practicing many different, any different kinds of meditation, it's very common to have that experience. And so it might be that resting on one's previous experiences of a sense of kind of the non-solidity of things when one looks at them, you can actually engage that more deliberately rather than just waiting for it to come as a result, engage it more deliberately. And then the realm of infinite space begins to open up with your eyes open. Don't need a big space. Don't need the eyes shut. It's more just a way of seeing, a way of sensing what's there that we usually perceive in a certain way. I'm just perceiving in a different way. Does this make sense? Yeah. Okay. So, yeah, I think as we said at the start, most of you guys are pretty interested in this, but if my, you know, why am I doing Dharma practice? Why am I meditating? And if people have a lot of different reasons why they're meditating, they're looking for a lot of different things, it's such a huge variety in terms of what brings people to practice meditation these days. It's enormous. And even within Buddha Dharma, and even people who come on retreats, and maybe I would say even people, really hardcore practitioners still have a lot of range of what they're wanting. So if what I want is in my life, I want simplicity and equanimity, and equanimity in a sense of with regard to the eight worldly conditions, praise, blame, pain, pleasure, success, failure, gain, loss. And that's kind of why I'm practicing. I have a vision of the Dharma and meditation can make my life more simple, and that attracts me, and I want this kind of evenness of equanimity. If that's kind of the goal of practice, or those are the goals of practice, I'm not sure whether there's that much point or need to open up to these kinds of realms, really. The attention to impermanence, realizing the impermanence of things would help, but I don't know that this is really necessary. If turning that around, if my vision of awakening, my idea of what an awakened person knows is that they know the impermanence of all things, I'm also not so sure that one needs to open up to the realm of infinite space. Or the other formless, the other immaterial realms. You don't really need that. So I would like to, having said that, just revisit again this question of desire, which we talked about, which I talked about at some point earlier on the retreat. And one of the points I made, and I was trying to convey its significance because it wasn't obvious, is it's not just, I think I said something like, what I desire, exactly what I desire, exactly what I'm looking for, is more significant than whether I reach a certain Jhana. How I relate to my desire and what exactly my desire is, is more significant than whether I reach Jhana. As a teaching, that very nugget there, how much what unfolds depends on both exactly what I'm desiring and how I'm relating to my desire. That as a teaching, I would say is more significant than any tip or technique or tell you how to move from this Jhana to the other. And I think I asked how many people believe me, and some of you put your hands up and some of you didn't. And then I talked a bit about desire. And I don't know. I think that the piece I wanted to emphasize was not so much how much desire we have, because sometimes I know, sometimes I can talk and it might sound to some people, oh, there's so much desire, I don't have enough desire. Rob has all this hot-blooded Mediterranean Arabic passion and whatever, and I'm not like that. So it wasn't really about how much, it was about how we relate to our desire and what exactly we are desiring and that an enormous amount hinges on that, an enormous amount of what will unfold for us as practitioners hinges on that. And knowing that and understanding that may be more important than how to get from one Jhana to another, and it may be more important than attaining whatever Jhana. So again, what are we really desiring? What is, again, there's such a huge range in the Dharma. Many people these days with this sort of meditation and mainstream culture come to the Dharma for some ease, understandably enough. There's some reduction of suffering, they're oppressed and badgered by their inner critic, and they want that to, they want a certain amount of freedom with relation to the inner critic or the self-judge or whatever you call it. They want some ease in their life, and I want some reduction of suffering. What might happen is a person might get that. They might get some ease over time, through practice, some ease, some reduction of suffering, some abating of the inner critic. Maybe it comes from a certain amount of Dharma practice. Maybe it comes that ease, that reduction of suffering and that reduction of the inner critic as much from a change in the outer circumstances. I'm in a relationship, now I'm out of a certain relationship, or life conditions change, and I actually feel better. So I've got what I wanted originally. I've got that degree of ease or that reduction of suffering that I wanted. And then maybe at that point I don't really want anything more. Why am I even practicing anymore? I've kind of got what I wanted. How much is Jhana's and these immaterial realms, it's like how much would such a person even want or need to come on a retreat like this or give much time to all this? Exactly what we want determines what unfolds, determines how we relate to practice and Dharma and all that. Someone was telling me a while ago they were talking about going on another Jhana retreat. For them it would have been the first Jhana retreat and explaining why they wanted to go. They thought that the Jhana's would enable them to be more present. And they had been practicing meditation for probably 25 or 30 years. And that was how they viewed the whole of practice. It was really about being more present. Can I be more present to life? And they practiced diligently, very, very committed, but that was their view. It's about being present. First up in that it's about being present actually as a whole cosmology. Do you understand that? Why would being present, in other words being present gives a kind of sanctity to something, to what? To the present moment, to this world as I perceive it. It's got a whole hidden metaphysics and I've talked about it so I'm not going to go into it now. But there's a hidden metaphysics and cosmology on which this idea and this kind of raising up of this aspiration over and over to be present, to be present to life, to be present to the way things are, to be present to the moment. All these charged words, life the moment, things as they are, they all pick or rather scratch away at the charge and they all hide certain world views. They're all pregnant with certain world views. Does this make sense? Again, such a person I don't think would need to come, first of all the jhanas are not going to make you that much more present. You can, I don't know, you don't need the jhanas to practice presence. So that maybe a person would have gone on, that person would have gone on a jhanaratri and actually found only a marginal increase, if at all, in their ability to be present. But would have also realized that you don't need that. I think more would at some point decide that it wasn't really their cup of tea, they weren't really interested in that. It would be hard for them to sustain an interest in jhana practice. When we talk about other realms or mastery or this mystical state or that mystical state, but the whole elevation of the idea of presence, those things have nothing to do with that. Presence has nothing to do with other realms or opening to other realms. Do you see what I'm trying to say? So that such a person had they gone on that jhana retreat probably would have decided, they wouldn't have been able to sustain the intention. If it was a long retreat like this one, they wouldn't have been able to sustain the intention. They wouldn't have kept working and playing because it actually wasn't what they wanted. They wanted something else and wrapped up in that other thing of wanting more presence, wrapped up in all that other thing of wanting more presence, was resting on a whole cosmology which was kind of entrenched and there was no real interest in shifting the cosmology. Or sometimes it's more, it's obvious in other ways, a person doesn't want to, is a kind of negative desire. My desire is not to budge a certain cosmology. So I also run into people talking about jhana practice and jhana retreats they've been on where there's, you know, I think I mentioned this before, the person's come after a jhana retreat and said, oh, it was really fun, I had a great time, whatever. But there was a kind of walled entrenchment in a certain cosmological view, in a certain view of the world, of human being, of the cosmos, of what awakening is, of being itself. And the absolute priority was that that view did not get challenged, that it remained what it was, it was so much invested in that view. That the world is like it is and existentially we have to face up to that. A purposeless world of cold, purposely dancing atoms in which a human being inexplicably finds themselves finite life, death, and the whole point of dharma practice is to realize that face up to it and be relatively okay with that existential truth. And that's the point of dharma practice. So you can do a little bit of jhanas, but not too much. You can have a little bit of fun. And even the language, oh, I had a great time, it's almost like I had a great time, it was like a little hobby at the side, kind of something that was kind of cute to play with for a little bit. But I don't want to do too much because then if I have enough of these kinds of experiences, then it might start challenging my view of the cosmos, my view of what human being is, my view of existence, of what the world is, of what reality is. So it's a kind of negative desire, if you like, operating, a desire for something not to be pushed on and challenged. You don't want that that person will limit the exploration of jhanas and ways of looking that we talked about yesterday so that they're not allowed to open up kind of drastic and radical, repeatedly open up drastic and radical changes in the sense of things in existence. Limited exploration limits the challenge. So you can zip through jhanas from one to eight, but don't really make any difference to the whole sense of existence. It's just a fun game that one's playing, maybe pleasant in the mind. Or again, it might be someone wants a kind of equanimity in daily life, and that's what we want, we've already said this. Then again, the interest in this kind of thing will actually be limited. Little bit of impermanence, maybe a little bit of the vastness of awareness because you get quite an equanimity there, maybe a little anatt at a certain level. But also those practices will be related to as a decrease of ppa, we've talked about this, as a decrease of reactivity, as a decrease of fussing, and that's the point of dharma practice, decrease of ppa and fuss. So I just want to speak a little bit more about desire. I do think it's kind of, yesterday we spoke about emptiness and talking about awakening and we're speaking about jhanas, and I still think more fundamental and more fundamentally important than emptiness, than jhanas, and then awakening is the question of desire and how we're relating to it. I'd say it's more fundamental than all of that. So when I talked about it the other time, what I perhaps should have said, and if it was a little out of balance, is people are different with desire. In other words, people are unique a little bit with their desire. It's not everyone burns with a certain kind of passionate desire. Some people do and some people don't. Some people have desired burns differently. So whatever I said, whenever it was, I didn't mean to sound, and I'm sorry if it did sound, as if I was kind of implying you should all burn this way, or like this, or with this kind of intensity. I think the more important question is what is authentic for you? What's authentic for you? Like your desire and how that burns. And some people, and I was giving some stories from my past, and how the pain of desire and of staying with something, and the sort of torment and all that, and the rub of it, and all that, but some people much more naturally don't have... It doesn't burn that way. It doesn't burn with a great huge passionate flame of intensity that's problematic, that they're not the heros of their desire, or it burns with... Either they just don't have so much. It's just what's authentic to them is not so much desire. This has to be respected. That's one of the points I'm trying to make. Or it burns in a kind of much easier, less intense way than something I might somehow communicate when I share about myself. Less pressured way. This I think is really important. Some people it does burn with a lot of pressure, with a lot of intensity. Sometimes the pressure and intensity is not authentic. It's something added on by the inner critic, or by peer pressure, or something like that. Sometimes a person's desire is not so flaming burning and passionate like that. Sometimes that's authentic, but sometimes not being so burning intensely is not authentic. In other words, there's actually something going on that a person is dampening their desire without even realizing it, inhibiting it, blocking it, avoiding it, fearing it, dissipating it, forgetting it. The question here, one of the important questions is about authenticity for each soul in relationship to desire. I think partly after the other talk on desires, I felt like I didn't make that clear enough, so that's partly why I'm saying this now. I think I said that a talk is a talk. When I give a talk in public, as many people, and it's being recorded, I speak in certain ways, but it should be. I hope you feel that if you come to an interview with me, I need to match you where you are and not impose anything about you need to be desiring this, or you need to have more desire or whatever it is. My desire for one-to-one interviews is to meet you where you are with that and to really respect, genuinely respect if your desire burns differently than mine or than the next person. It would be a bit obnoxious if I didn't, I think, but talking with a group is a different thing and talking when there's recordings. We don't know who's going to listen to this in however many years. It's a different thing. Anyway, I didn't make that clear enough. I need to respect how your desire burns and how much desire there is, if that's authentic. I may also respect, even if we're working one-on-one, I may also respect even if your desire is different than mine, and why should it be the same? I need also to respect your process and where you are in your process of uncovering your, let's call it, natural and authentic flame and desire, or where you are in liberating it and knowing its power. That takes time, and that's at a certain place, that process, at any time. If I'm working one-to-one with someone, that's also part of what I need to do. I'm not going to, even if some, in a sense, actually this person has a lot more desire and they're not really, for whatever reason, not really in touch with it or not really allowing it, I still need to respect the process there and not push that impatiently or out of time. There's a lot of different elements to consider here, I think, when we talk, certainly when we talk one-on-one, and then again when we're talking in a larger context. Authenticity, authenticity in two respects, there's authenticity about what I desire, which Monica asked this question. What's the difference, again, through introspection, can I slowly learn to feel the difference between a desire that's coming, let's say, more from what we might call ego and a desire from what we might more call soul? That's why we give partly all the soul-making teachings point to the difference, all those elements of the imaginal, et cetera. They point to all this talk about Eros points to what can I discern the difference when a desire of mine is actually not authentic? I might have been pursuing something for ages before maybe someone points out or maybe I realize actually this isn't what I really, really want, it's not what I really, really care about. Yes, as I said the other day when we're talking about we get inundated with advertising and all that, but what about things like how many people have been engaging emptiness practices diligently, diligently, and yet emptiness and that realization is actually not what they really, really want. How did that happen? I think emptiness, again, what unfolds in terms of your emptiness realization depends and is determined to a large part by what exactly I'm desiring. If I'm not really genuinely, authentically passionate about it, it won't deliver. I do all the practices, I kind of do the things, but it's not your thing. What I design, the difference, discerning, learning to discern the difference between what's really a, what should we say, authentic, deep soul desire and what's a more ego desire and what's just indoctrination and programming from cultures or the wider culture or the subculture including Dharma cultures. You're in a situation where everyone's the teacher and everyone else is going, I'm emptiness, and doing these practices and people are excited and one naturally says, oh, that's what I got to do. It could be Jhanas as well, but I would say for these things to really deliver, there needs to be this authentic passion and the same thing, even a person wants to be a writer or a singer-songwriter, whatever it is. It's like, why? Where's the desire coming from? Is there something that needs that or is there something that needs you to do that? These are hard questions. So authentic about why desire and authentic also, as I said earlier, about how my desire burns and that's really different soul styles. I think really needs to be respected. Some people, yeah, just kind of, it's a whole big intense thing, whatever, and some people much lesser. Some people, it's a quieter flame, but it's very, very steady and it's not so dramatic. What's authentic to you, to your soul? And then there's another question and there's another aspect, like how to be true to one's deep desires. What does that mean? What does that look like? What does it mean really for me to honor my desires? For this, I need to know myself. If I say, I want this, I'm going to do this, I will do this, I've pledged myself to this, this is the thing that I really care about, da-da-da. And you see a person, little time goes by and they're not following through on it. And there's all kinds of, often to them, look like good reasons. Oh, my mother hurt her leg, or this or that, or this, or someone asked me to do this, and there's a million reasons. But oftentimes it's actually to do with self-knowledge. I don't know if for some reason this person is not seeing this pattern of getting very passionate about something and not following through. It's not steady. It's difficult stuff. This is why I say this is actually more fundamental than emptiness or jhana or awakening or whatever, because all that is going to depend on how wise am I about my desire and what's my relationship to desire and how well do I know myself around that. It's interesting. I think one of the gifts of modernity is that in a way we're free. There's no dominant narrative, dominant kind of view anymore in modernity of what the most important thing is in life and therefore what's most desirable. So we're not obliged to believe that this or that is the best kind of desire. If we were somehow wiser or better or clearer or less deluded, that would be what we would really desire. Modernity has done away with all that. If I was just less deluded, I would simply desire awakening or I would simply desire this. Modern Western culture has just done away with that. It's no longer legitimate to say to anyone else, this or that is what makes a life really worth living and that's what you should really desire. What that does, the gift of that is it makes us free, free to choose or to a certain extent it makes us free or more free than if that were uniformly agreed in the culture. Like in certain cultures it was always agreed. It's best to become a monk. If you've really got the desire and the spirit and you're really clear, you'd become a monk and everyone knew that and someone who wasn't becoming a monk knew that they were making a kind of second level choice but that whole view and narrative and framework has gone. There's nothing that we can point to anymore, nothing that it's legitimate to point to in Modern Western culture. There's an absence, the gift of which is a certain kind of freedom, freedom to choose to a certain degree. We have to deal with all kinds of other stuff that gets in the way of freedom or looks like freedom actually isn't. This very gift is at the same time I think a huge problem, a huge problem for Modern culture. The loss of any kind of objective criteria or kind of agreed upon universally agreed upon criteria to determine what is it that makes a life really worth living. What is it? What is the good life? What is a beautiful life? What is a life most worth living? Of course relative to that is what then should I desire? All this is connected. The absence of that is the cause of huge and widespread and profound problems in modern culture, modern society, postmodern society. These are ethical issues. I think at the root of our climate change species extinction, other racial injustice, so much of what's going on in the world are actually ethical issues at root. Part of the very ethical problem is this absence. I've talked about that quite a lot recently on recordings and I hope to be able to talk about it some more. I just think it's so pressing and so important. You see how all these things are connected. We talk emptiness, blah, blah, blah, but until the desires there and until that's connected to what actually makes a life worth living and how are we going to relate to all this and what is my relationship with all that? It's huge. I just want to touch on this and pinpoint just again, it's like what's actually significant? Sometimes we don't realize what's significant because we're certain that something else is significant. You actually have to go to another level and say, oh, there's something else here. A whole other level that I hadn't even considered that's actually really, really significant. Just following on a couple of small things about desire, just primarily for soul makers. I'll be brief because it's not a soul making retreat. If you love soul making time and if you love soul making practices, then you should realize, if not by now, you should realize at some point that your very sense of soul making dharma will expand. It will expand into new territories that it hadn't included before. It will expand new possibilities, new realms of existence and being and if your being will get included. Have you? You should have. Okay. Well, if you haven't already, you should. More and more gets included in worked into the soul making dynamic. What soul making dharma pertains to and is, the sense of it starts to expand. I think at some point most practitioners, most soul making dharma practitioners will realize two things. One is that jhana practice is a kind of art and as such is also part of and contributes to the art of soul making practice. Some of you already kind of get that connection, others of you much less or it's not there yet. So jhana practice, the art of jhana practice becomes or is seen to become very relevant to soul making dharma practice and skill and skill in relationship and all of that. Sorry is relevant in terms of the sensitivity and the attunement that we talked about, the magic. So some of you already get a sense of the magic of jhana practice and this magic of playing with perception and it's the same. If you're practicing soul making dharma, you're practicing a kind of magic too. You start to see, oh these things are really really connected. They're really relevant and relevant to what possibilities open up. So that's one thing that should get clear. A second thing that should get clear is that being able to really sustain or the demand in jhana practice to really sustain, to stay with over and over and for hours and hours to marinate in, to return to the primary nimitta, to let that really mature that way and the practice mature that way. That kind of sustaining needs eros and the very way we're relating to the primary nimitta is in soul making dharma language erotic in the small definition of erotic. And to sustain, to be able to sustain that eros in the small definition is relevant to the art and skill and also relevant to being in relationship with anything that we love. So again this question, how does your eros burn? What's your style? Is it, oh, get excited about this and then a quick flame and then I get a quick flame of excitement about that and then a quick flame of excitement, all this wonder opens up and then something else. Or is it this very steady just stay with one thing, stay with one thing or what? What's the style of eros? But a lot depends on that in terms of our relationship with jhana practice and our ability to really sustain. It is an erotic, in a small sense it's an erotic relationship. And again that comes back to what's authentic, what's the authentic way my eros burns and a kind of contradictory question or complimentary question because of the nature of soul making dhana. There's always this double question, because of the nature of soul and soul making, there's always this question, what's authentic to my soul? And there's the possibility of my soul's growing and extending and learning new ways and new ways it can burn that I hadn't even recognized were available to me, part of me. The kinds, the styles of my fire burning, of my eros. So you get a kind of a complicated question there. Second small thing for soul makers is I said much earlier on the retreat and this is connected to all this business about desire, I said also one of the most significant things, one of the most crucial elements of a fruitful practice is the view that we have of the self on the path. And if that's problematic then no matter what we experience in meditation, no matter what we open to, it won't deliver its full fruit. It can be stymied, it can be blocked. The view of the self on the path. So this is important for everyone, everyone. And it's not something we usually talk about. We usually expect no if I just do the right practices that will all get taken care of. Maybe, maybe not. When we come, again this is just for people interested in soul making, talk about, so a view of the self on the path can also be related to the fantasy of the path and the fantasy of the self on the path. And sometimes a person recognizes, oh this is really, I really need something like this to help me, to help me sustain whether it's on jhana practice or emptiness or just dharma practice or soul making practice or whatever it is. I need something in the view of the self. And if you know soul making, dharma practice, I need a fantasy here to actually sustain and keep delivering, keep encouraging me, supporting me. So there's the possibility of a kind of formulaeic answer, which is the bodhisattva and take the bodhisattva vows and having that kind of quasi-imaginal relationship with the whole sense of the self on the path. I'm a bodhisattva, I'm doing this for all beings or I'm a warrior or whatever it is. And all that's okay, kind of taking a kind of formula if you like. But it will be much more powerful and much more soulful if it's personal, unique to you, to your particulars, authentic again. The word authentic comes from auto and auto means self. So it pertains to you. In other words, if the fantasy is a particular one, not just a generic Buddhist formula or something else like that. If you are the author, that word author is phonetically related to authentic but not etymologically related. It's etymological root as from algary in Latin which means to increase. An author is someone that grows something. But phonetically they're related, authentic and author. If you want to be a real author, I need to be authentic and that means getting in touch with what this self needs, what's personal in particular. So how do I access that? Yes, possibly through generic universal Buddhist formulas or whatever. Or it's accessed in one of two ways which is out of the corner of my eye, so to speak. I mean by fantasy is something we kind of see out of the corner of our eye when I'm really in love with something. When I'm inspired, there's somewhere, I'm not really noticing it first, somewhere is hiding a fantasy of what I'm doing and of the self in its journey of doing what I'm loving. When I'm in love, when I'm inspired, there's a fantasy hiding there. So how do I discover what my personal fantasy is? I kind of glimpse it out of the corner of my eye. It's not really an image. It's a kind of background sort of narrative image but I can glimpse that in those times and then I can use it and then I can draw upon it and then I can develop it in practice and it becomes really fertile potentially as a support for my desire, for my sustaining on the path, whatever path I've chosen. So it can come out of those times of love, out of the corner of my eye I catch it or it can come right in and through my dukkha. When I'm really struggling on the path, when I'm really struggling with a sense of the self on the path, when it's got so heavy, so frustrating, when the longing is burning painfully, when there's grief perhaps, when there's despair, right there in and through my dukkha, the very crucible of that dukkha, there's enough in there. I have to go into it with a lot of skill and a lot of the right kind of holding but if I do, in the alchemy of it, of this crucible of dukkha, it can emerge a fantasy of self on the path that's liberating and supportive and sustaining and powerful and generative and nourishing and beautiful and endlessly fertile as soul making images are. So it's exactly when I feel really the pain of the problem of having a goal and my relationship with it, that that's, if I come with all the soul making skill that I have and art, that's exactly when the most fertile thing can come. Okay last thing, so that was a bit of a, not a digression, again I feel very important of this whole desire business but I've talked about it so much elsewhere, it's just a bit more. Back to the realm of infinite space, same deal with mastery, same things, we're aiming for the same things, in time when it's ready, can go there not from any jhana as I've described, can go there either by subtle intention just from a normal consciousness, through an insight way of looking, through this just looking at things and just seeing through them so to speak, seeing, sensing their non-solidity, can go from not the fourth jhana but the second or the third etc, want to play with all this and develop all that. And then what I think, one of the things I think gets really delightful at this point is walking in the realm of infinite space, I mean going for a walk on the lanes and very interesting and very lovely experience I would say. And then again with every new jhana we've added more permutations for our leapfrog ping pong right, just because you can jump around all kinds of different places to this one and that one. I think that's all I wanted to say today so let's have a bit of quiet together. One last thing just to Hopefully! Thank you everybody. Time for tea. Are there any interviews tonight? There's a few interviews tonight and then we'll put the updated form later on tonight. Okay, so time for tea. Enjoy. Please consider supporting DharmaSeed with a year-end gift. Your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all. Visit DharmaSeed.org-slash-donate to learn more. And thanks.

 Thank you. Okay, so what I would like to talk about today is the, primarily the relationship of Jhana as an insight, something about that at least, quite a lot about that. And in a way, fortuitous, some of what came up in the Q&A yesterday regarding some of the questions really elicited a sort of outlining, explaining of a kind of different way of framing what insight could be. So we've already kind of made good headway with a lot of this, the insight part. At least some of you have heard or read many times this, regarding the insight part, have heard or read this kind of thing many times. It's been framed to you many times. My, and for some of you it will be really quite new, really quite new. And so find either way, my experience teaching this over the years is that it's to really fully understand what we're saying here, or rather this frame, this framework for an understanding of what insight could be, or how we can understand the journey of insight and what we're doing. And actually the journey of dharma, so it's not just insightment, it's actually how the whole thing fits together and can kind of fit together quite coherently in a way that it just goes really into the depths in a very coherent way. And the whole dharma coheres in that. That framework really takes a while to fully understand. And it takes really a while to really understand the implications of it. So to me part of the reasons for presenting the dharma this way or presenting insight this way is because of the implications are profound and coherently profound. It's very, very rare for someone to fully understand this and fully understand its implications on two or three hearings or reading or something like that or even sometimes ten. You may think you do, or one may think one does, but experience has shown me over some years of teaching that actually even when people think they do, there's more here to really grasp this. So if it feels like, what the hell are you talking about? That's all fine and normal because this is a process of understanding something and it should be. If you feel like, yeah, yeah, yeah, I know all that, then maybe that might be the time to question a little bit. It takes time, it takes repetition, it takes pondering and again this kind of active pondering. Someone told me they came, did a long retreat and we worked together and then they went back home and very wisely I thought, we're trying to fit this framework that I'm going to explain about insight and that we've already touched on. We're trying to fit it into frameworks of Dharma or insight meditation that they already knew. It must be, it must just a version of that or whatever and after a lot of hard thinking and a lot of intelligence, I realized that they couldn't actually, it was something quite different. But the point I'm trying to make is about the active pondering and the active wrestling with something and practice. So it's quite rare for someone to have done all that with this and it's, so if you feel confused there's no, you know, there's good grounds for that. Hopefully not just because I'm completely incoherently babbling. That may be the case. It's also, some of you will know, a lot of what I'm going to say today regarding insight and emptiness in that business forms really the conceptual foundation for soul making Dharma and it's kind of what gives legitimacy to soul making Dharma and doesn't just make you as a soul making Dharma practitioner easily consignable to the fruitcake bin. It's really, okay. So back to repeating a few, some of this we've said already either yesterday or earlier in the retreat, but still because it's difficult to really see how it all coheres and really digest that in one's being, repeating a bit. And some will be repeat from as I said near the beginning and some, perhaps from yesterday, perhaps in different words, different approaches. So perhaps most common in the Dharma world with regards to Jhana practice is a kind of you first you practice your Jhanas and you get that together or rather first in a session even first you do your Jhanas then you do your insight, right? And if you're not into Jhanas because either they're dangerous or taboo or they're ridiculously too difficult to reach first you practice your concentration, you're studying your mind then you do your insight, right? That's a kind of normal way of come across that. That's perhaps the common view. First the concentration, if no Jhana or concentration then the insight. As I pointed out in one of the other talks and I gave that example when we went through all those Pali words to me reading that passage and kind of getting a sense of the context of it and similar passages in the Pali Canon. This is really a very contrived formula that the Buddha's presenting in a certain teaching situation. The whole thing is probably a contrivance. It's first you do Jhana 1 then you do Jhana 2 in a session then you do Jhana 3 then you do Jhana 4 and then you do Vyavipasana or whatever. If you kind of get a grasp of the session and who he's talking to and it's not really an instruction for the meditator sits down and does this thing in order, I don't think you could but to me it doesn't read. There's not anything convincing there at all to suggest that this is what you need to do in your 45 minutes of sitting or whatever. First the usual view, first your concentration then your insight and one could look at passages like that and say the Buddha is saying it, look at this. But I don't actually view such passages as actual meditation instructions really at all. And again repeating other stuff we've said, we could, you know, there's a view that when you're concentrating the mind you're sharpening the mind. You're making it more pointy, its ability to point and you're sharpening Manjushri's sword. Manjushri is the bodhisattva of wisdom. So really what you're doing in concentration, the most important thing that you're doing is sharpening the mind, sharpening Manjushri's sword in inverted commas so that your mind and the gaze of your mind and the attention of your mind can dissect the phenomenal world, dissect experience. And in that dissection it dissects so finely because of how sharp Manjushri's sword mind has become through the concentration, through the one pointedness, dissects it so sharply that it reveals the ultimately true atomic nature of things. That there is a momentary arising and passing of five aggregates, etc., through time very, very fast. And if I sharpen my sword enough I can see that. Or and again this is all repeat, or one has the kind of view that what you're really doing in concentration practice is gathering the energy of the mind like a laser beam similarly. And that laser beam of intense energy gets focused on something, it gets focused on rock, layers of rock. And because of the intensity and because of the power of the laser beam, the power of the mind, empowered, energized, gathered together through concentration, that laser beam is able to drill down through layers, through rock layers of construction, rock layers of fabrication, rock layers of illusion, all the way down until it reaches something called reality. Or again all this is repeat from the beginning of the retreat, or the view that what you're really doing in concentration is making the mind so steady, imperturbably steady, that this unwavering gaze cannot help but see the truth of things. That unwavering gaze, we don't know the nature of things, we don't see the truth of things because our gaze is not unwavering enough, it wobbles. We get micro distracted or hugely distracted. We can just unwaveringly gaze at something that will reveal how things are, how things really are. Or there's an idea, and again some of this is explicit, some of it's implicit, some of it's kind of, you have to kind of tease it out of a way of thinking that you hear about. Or we have the idea, and or we have the idea, that getting rid of thought is what we're trying to do through concentration. Thought is the problem, thought is the enemy. Thought is the enemy and the obscurer of truth. And that when we get rid of thought through concentration, then we, in doing so, we're lifting the veils on reality because thought is obscuring that way. We lift the veils on reality on the real world. So there's all of those, there's an explicit or implicit kind of conceptions of what we're doing and how concentration fits into what we're doing. Then perhaps more recently, but perhaps to some degree all the way along the history of Buddhism, there's also the idea that awakening doesn't really involve any extraordinary or deep insight or realization. Applying in this view is just really involves the ordinary sense of things, the ordinary sense of the world that everyone would agree on, but without the tendency to papancia, to gross papancia that we all know that getting caught up and self-obsessed and making a big issue of this or that. Without just the ordinary sense of things, no extraordinary insight, without so much of a tendency or without any tendency for gross papancia and with a reduction of the three kilosas, the three primary departments, greed, aversion and delusion. And that becomes what awakenings. Then we have to ask, well, what do you mean by delusion? If you said there's no extraordinary realization. And in some models, delusion will just be delusion and papancia are equivalent. Papancia, because it's creating all this mess everywhere, is basically delusion. You're believing all kinds of nonsense, all kinds of stuff that's not true, swimming in that murky turbulent soup and that's delusion. So that's what you get rid of when you get rid of Avijja, for instance. Or it may be that the Avijja is a little more deeply defined as believing in a real personality, believing in the self as a reality of personality. So that then, okay, there is this nothing really special changes. There's no special insight or realization about the nature of things, just the ordinary sense of the world, less papancia, less greed and ill will, and the end of the belief in the personality and instead the belief perhaps in the process of the aggregates in time. The true nature of the self is this process of momentary aggregates arising and passing, five aggregates of body, mind arising, passing, moment, moment. And that's what awakening is and that's what an awakened person knows. So in that last system or the different variations of it, there may be no place for jhana practice at all because why would you need jhana practice? There's no extraordinary, as I said, or deep insight realization into the nature of things. It's just the ordinary sense of things, less papancia. Maybe jhana has a place in exactly that, as a kind of retraining the mind into the habit of non-papancia. So that's what happens when we're in jhana, the papancia just very quietens very much and that's the purpose of jhana practice. You're just getting used to less papancia until the mind is weaned off the habit of papancia. So jhana has its, that's its place or it contributes to, is that state or somehow it contributes to the lessening of gross papancia. So there are variations of this view, this kind of view to different degrees. As I pointed out before, all of them, and this is really, really key, all of them quite rightly need to situate the view of concentration and thus of jhana practice coherently within a larger view which must somehow start with where am I going? What is awakening? The view of awakening which needs to be intimately tied up with what is the view of truth and reality. So they go together, they go together. The view of awakening and the view of truth and reality go, someone may not have even thought this way but it needs to be to some degree coherent this way. The view of awakening is tied in with what is the view of truth and reality. If I'm absolutely fixed on a certain view of truth and reality, this world as it seems to common sense post Isaac Newton and Descartes and all those people is the reality of things. My awakening or my vision of awakening has to fit into that view, whatever it is. The view of awakening tied in with that is the view of truth and reality and drawing on that or emerging from that is the view of what insight is. Do you see how these fit together? View of awakening, truth and reality, insight. Insight is what opens up truth and reality and that gives me awakening. And then last stage within all that framework I have to situate coherently what is my conceptual framework, what is my view of jhanas or no jhanas, jhanas, what for and as we said before what do I emphasize within jhana practice. So what I emphasize moment to moment and really fussing over this can I bloom in well stay with this my nostrils or whatever. How much I emphasize that and how much I even get upset or not at its success or failure in the moment is actually determined by this larger scale structure built to well how does my ability to stay at the nostrils relate to insight. What do I mean by insight is related to what do I what's my view of reality and truth and that's related to awakening. You see how all this nestles together? It must. Now it needs to be to some degree coherent but all this fits together in different models, different paradigms. What's also quite common is that if someone is supportive of jhana practice then jhanas contribute to insight, so jhanas lead to insight much less so the other way around. Insight is much less regarded as insight practice as a process or insight per se having insights as something that opens up the jhanas or delivers the jhanas. So the causality is one way and that's probably again what most of you have come across right? Jhanas go to insight. What we were saying here earlier in the treat is that jhanas are not enough for liberation which we said but they have their part in what contributes to liberation alongside other factors not just insight but other factors that we talked about. So jhanas contribute to liberation awakening and insight is or the pool jhanas are part of the pool of factors that open up liberation and insight is a large contributing factor to liberation as well. I want to say as well as jhanas can bring insight absolutely jhanas should deliver insight and we want to go into phase how? How do jhanas bring insight? But also I want to stress that insight leads to jhanas so another way into jhanas is through insight. Or if you're doing insight in a struggling for a way let's say in what I would say is the most fruitful way jhanas are going to be very available on that road. And so jhanas lead to insight, insight leads to jhanas and the question in both directions is how? So not wanting to dismiss any of these other conceptions at all but really wanting to add to them there are some modifications I would definitely make to some of them regarding views about what's ultimately true and what's ultimately real but it's all good there is a place for the laser beam there is a place for all the rest of it. In addition to all those views all those ways of conceiving with necessary ontological modifications and what we would like to say is that an awakened person as if you're an awakened person knows something deeply they know something and to know something deeply means not just as an idea not just in the head in the heart and in the being they know something deeply and they can engage that knowing in their very sense of things and they can engage that knowing deliberately in their very sense of things it's a deep heart knowing and what do they know they know the emptiness of all phenomena that's what an awakened person knows the emptiness the total emptiness of all phenomena the total radical emptiness of all phenomena which means a phenomena is empty and it doesn't leave any bit of itself or any level of itself that's not empty that's what the radical bit means goes to its root. An awakened person knows deeply the emptiness of all phenomena there is no electron no basic unit of matter that is not empty happens to agree with current understanding of physics but that's that may or may not change but there's no electron there's no basic building block of matter that's not empty there is no self or self view or conception of the self that is ultimately true say it the other way around that's not empty all conceptions all views of the self are empty this is what an awakened person knows the energy body is empty space is empty and not just empty of having things in it empty of having independent existence of existing independently of the way of looking of having inherent existence awareness is empty awareness is not fundamental consciousness is not fundamental it is empty too time is empty not just past and future but the present moment to empty awakening is also empty so this is what an awakened person knows and to say that their empty means as we said yesterday that they don't none of these things no phenomenon whatsoever exists independently of the way of looking it exists as this or as that dependent on the way of looking and exists as anything at all dependent on a way of looking it does not fabricate as a phenomenon unless the way of looking makes it fabricate as a phenomenon so what's that got to do with freedom from suffering is it obvious what this got to do with freedom from suffering yeah we only cling to what we think is real actually so when I first started teaching this and I realized what's going on and on and on about stuff and then some some people were just like well why are you talking about this it was just as if it was some abstract philosophy sort of thing but no it's very it's intimately directly connected with suffering we suffering comes from clinging craving right that's pretty much what most Buddhists believe that's all makers no soul makers also believe that we have something else called Eros we're not going into that today um claving claving craving and clinging are what cause suffering take them away and the suffering goes out you should know this at some level or you wouldn't be here if you didn't know it but we only crave and cling to what we sense is real when we realize something is not real we don't cling or crave we don't try and get rid of it it's so the sense of self the sense of an object or other the sense of time all these things so seeing the emptiness means seeing that they're not really real in the way that we thought they were we say they're neither real nor not real but that's enough to take away the the sense of inherent reality that we usually have in relation to things dependent on which our craving and clinging gets established and and dependent on that craving and clinging our suffering do you understand this is really important okay well how does an awakened person get to such a such a knowledge such a sort of far out sounding understanding and knowledge again is in the heart and the whole being well one way one way is by playing with what we call ways of looking which we talked about again yesterday and several other times way of looking means the way of relating the way of conceiving the way of viewing the way of sensing and everything that's wrapped up in that relationship with any any phenomena any experience perception experience appearance in the moment that's what we mean by way of looking everything that's wrapped up in there and one begins one way of doing it one can begin playing with different ways of looking and one starts to see one like a scientist it starts to see oh well this way of looking actually when I look that way like when we're in the middle of papansha when I look that way it actually fabricates more suffering and suffering gets worse or gets locked into place it actually fabricates more sense of self the self feels more solid more separate more contracted etc it fabricates more of a whatever it is that I'm tussling with or grasping after more of an object and more sense of time time itself also feels heavier more pressured one starts to realize all this and because I'm playing with ways of looking I also start to realize all this some ways of looking that do the opposite they release suffering they unfabricate the self to some degree they unfabricate objects and things to some degree they unfabricate eventually one sees the sense of time as well so those are the interesting ones actually it's all interesting those are the ones I want to follow and develop the ones that unfabricate suffering and with the unfabrication of suffering they unfabricate self and the world of objects and eventually time etc and one can over practice getting really interested in this and also the delight of practicing this way not just the art of it but the the freedom that it delivers in the moment looking at this thing this way means I'm relating to this thing so in right there and then I don't have to wait ten months or ten years right there and then the suffering goes out of experience the self is less fabricated the object itself gets less fabricated this is a there's release relief ease openness etc and all kinds of we could say mystical states of consciousness begin to open because the self and objects and time are not being fabricated in their usual way so other other senses of things open delightful ways of practice one gets really interested in that develops one's range of ways of looking and also one's depth in other words learning to as we said yesterday some ways of looking let go of a little bit of clinging and some ways of looking that we can develop let go of clinging at a whole deeper level a much subtler level of clinging and because they do that they have even more power in unfabricating because it's the clinging and I use that word very widely but it's the clinging that's that's fabricating it's fabricating not just the suffering but also the self objects the world time etc so one gain when develops one's range and one's skill and one's depth and goes deeper and deeper into this learning to unfabricate more through the through the ways of looking that one is developing through practice so we talked about for example pleasure and pain and equanimity and said equanimity is a letting go of push and pull in other words it's a it's an attenuating and letting go of clinging and as I just do that and do that and do that the pleasure and pain get less eventually the pain might go to pleasure and then get that get left I get left with neutral vedna neither pleasant and eventually that fades eventually as we touched on yesterday again eventually everything fades no thing no self no consciousness in the usual sense no time no present moment no space no world had different names for that the unfabricated the deathless cessation of perception and feeling the unborn lots of different names we can open to that something that's incredibly hard to put into language because language is based on a world of things and subjects and objects but this is possible for us if we just take this one idea of ways of looking notice that some fabricate more and some fabricate less and get really interested in that and just keep going get all the way to the unfabricated just following one principle and playing playing and having a fun and a delightful time doing it it doesn't stop there I would say some people would say it stops there now I've realized the unborn I would say it doesn't stop there because then one one can also see time is empty as well one may have seen that getting there and one may need additional little ways of seeing that and also what is fabricated is empty fabrications are empty the things that are fabricated in this process they're not real things either so if time is empty the time in which the process of fabrication happens also is empty that means the whole notion and and fabricated things are empty that means the whole notion of fabrication is empty so the very idea and thread that we were following this idea of fabrication ends up dissolving as well it's empty too when one had reached the unfabricated the unborn whatever you want to call it some people use the word nirvana for that there can be an extreme duality between that transcending of the world in the unfabricated and the world the world of samsara the world of form the world of struggle this world that we all agree on and then there's this that's completely transcendent this holy this essentially worthless except as potential stepping stone to that once one has seen that fabrication too is empty then actually the whole duality collapses as well because there is no fabricated and without a fabricated the unfabricated as an idea doesn't make sense so that hierarchy of sacredness collapses everything empty everything sacred unfabricated fabricated no ultimate truth no place that has ultimately speaking more reality no no view that has ultimately more reality than another there are only left ways of looking that's what we have as human beings an awakened human it only ways of looking a huge range and depth of ways of looking ways of playing with perception and the art of that and we can do that then a awakened person can do that for different ends classical buddha dharma of course why do I choose this way of looking over that way of looking it's because I want less suffering so this situation I look at this way to reduce the suffering it's just basic for noble truths in condensed version when you get into soul making dharma actually you might choose other reasons for ways of looking that are not primarily the reduction of suffering that's not really what you're going for you're going for something else sometimes there will often in soul making dharma of course be an overlap between in other words when we choose a view that because we want the sacredness there or the beauty or the soul making that most often also reduces the suffering but sometimes not but classical buddha dharma that's why we choose certain things everything's oriented to reducing suffering so practicing what was that word the Buddha used mudubhutte the malleability of mind the malleability of perception the malleability of ways of looking of views always say playing with perception meaning playing with perceiving this is a way of construing what insight practice is playing with perception and seeing through playing with perception what happens when I look this way when I look that way when I look that way when I look at the fourth way seeing what the perception is I perceive a certain way the perception is the experience the appearance the phenomenon depends on the way of looking so that in a nutshell is what we could say is insight practice and how it all hangs together now we can understand and in a way we've hinted at this quite strongly several times already we can actually understand the jhanas as doing that too okay as well as being these really really valuable resources in all kinds of ways that we've talked about as well as being certainly the way we're teaching them here and the way you guys are practicing as well as kind of developing our sensitivity and our attunement and all the beauty of that and the gifts that that gives in all kinds of realms of our life relational emotional energetic soul making etc etc also for emptiness practice but as well as resources and sensitivity and everything else we said about the jhanas we can also view them as playing with perception and begin to understand actually there's one spectrum there's one spectrum of more or less fabrication of suffering dukkha is a better word if we really suffering such a heavy word in English but dukkha you know sometimes you open to a new level and you wouldn't have considered where you were before has any dukkha in it whatsoever and it's only when you go deeper that you realize relatively speaking the older level had which you've now transcended had some very subtle dukkha in it so I prefer the word dukkha because it it because it's a foreign word it can keep for us a much subtler range than we tend to associate with the word suffering but you realize there's one spectrum one spectrum of dukkha we can be fabricating a lot really a lot somewhat less somewhat less somewhat less somewhat less all the way down but that spectrum of fabrication of suffering is the same spectrum as the fabrication of self-sense they're just two threads of the same rope of the same spectrum when we're suffering a lot the self-sense is fabricated a lot much more solid much more contracted much more separate much more but so is the world is fabricated the perception of the world is correspondingly it's just another thread of that rope of one spectrum so it's making sense yeah and so is clinging if we use the word broadly enough this end the dukkha end has got a lot of clinging and craving in it and as I said when you start engaging practices and really sustaining them and playing with them practices that take away clinging craving repeatedly moment after moment then we move down that spectrum and as we take away more subtle levels of clinging and craving we just find it's the same it's the same spectrum so this is a spectrum of suffering it's a spectrum of self-sense it's a spectrum of object sense things sense because they fade as well sensations things sight sounds all the rest of it the world also of clinging and also of jhanas the whole the whole thing is just one you understand it's one spectrum just different we're just talking about different if you like threads of a rope that's does this make sense I'm going I'm going through it quite quickly but but so a few little things I want to throw in at this point and this little bit came out of Andy's question yesterday which I'm glad you asked so after a jhana in a jhana or kind of around the territory of a jhana and he was asking about the happiness in the sense of self in relation to the happiness but let me say a couple of things and in the territory of the jhana after in or around it sort of peri jhana a few things happen in relation to classical insights again which is tied into what I've just been saying with we're more clear and we're more spacious so that something like impermanence is just completely obvious to us it's just in that space it's obvious that things are impermanent also because of the yumminess of a jhana whichever jhana because of the yumminess it's much easier to see the dukkha the relative dukkha of other pleasures or the the fact that other pleasures are a lot less satisfying so when you tasted a certain let's say just even just a really strong peaty and you're really absorbed in it it would be hard to match that with any sensual experience certainly the happiness more saliently for what I want to say today but these these are all related because they all have to do with the kind of unfabricating is that in around or after a jhana it's much easier to see the phenomena are not self they're not me not mine it's much easier to see why tying it what we just said about this this rope this spectrum of fabrication which has different threads in it of different things that are if you like getting fabricated together as one as one process just different aspects of the same process the jhana already tying it to that idea is already less fabrication of self and so because the self is less fabricated what the self habitually does is also less fabricated at the time and one of the things the self habitually does is appropriates me mine me mine me mine me mine without thinking about it that's what the self does the more self the more me mining the more appropriation as the self gets fabricated just naturally in the jhana fabricated less naturally fabricated less there's less me mining and because there's less me mining this appropriation things are much more likely to appear to us as not me not mine annata as the Buddha said not me not mine and the transition from that point to deliberately viewing things as not me not mine is just a very small step because it's already in that direction does that make sense so there is in jhana's this attenuation this unfabricating of self and that and that has all these factors unfabricated together self is one of them however I want to read a note that I got this is really really important you talked about resistance against the idea of having an autonomous self I felt this was blocking the whole process so person reflected on this and then then then they said I felt this was blocking the whole process and made me believe that I had matured in some jhanic states when actually this wasn't the case today it feels more like this belief of having matured took me away from actual learning I then noticed that I tend to stay in a passive receptive mode during meditation but also in life when today actually I tried to play with active and receptive modes finally a strong felt sense of I arose I am alive I exist I am alive I exist I am here in this world I can influence I can be active I felt very powerful now I can actually find my pace and my way of working this psychological basis made this psychological basis just wasn't developed wow what a blessing and lovely fruit of this retreat this is really really important so it it it's important because it stands in contradiction to what I just said but an important contradiction so I've just said your jhanas are about fabricating less and here a person was saying actually by by the way we're practicing jhana actually it does invite the self to be active to be more autonomous to see itself and feel itself as more active and autonomous that sounds like a more separate and more fabricated self right really really important that's why I said when was it at some point in the last few days careful you may think or one might think very understandably I need a jhana to heal something and it may be more not the jhana that we need to heal something for some people it is they need to just really bathe in that third jhana whatever it is but probably more often than not it's something in the ways that we're adopting to work that heals something psychologically and and has its mirror in the life its mirrors it's mirrored in the life that that freeing and that opening and that reclaiming is maybe going to be more significant than whether I have attained x or y jhana so when we talked about this I said you know the the ability to stay and choose to be intense and choose to show up that way me being intense and the me can be quite a subtle sense but it's still I have to sustain something or opening opening really opening the being surrendering opening abandoning or what this person is sharing or the happiness that's a kind of emotional range that I don't usually let do something there's many many examples but here's very important kind of exception can you understand what we're saying here um okay so that was one thing and then um one spectrum so everything's tied in this this threads of one rope um so revisiting our idea of working with pain and being able to look at pain and the pain unfabricates or we refabricate we refabricate unpleasant sensation in the body is pleasant p t or happiness or whatever it is so just to be clear about this because it might be that someone hears about that um and thinks well yeah when you're meditating this pain basically you're uh you know because of the meditation you're relaxing and the relaxation allows the tissues the muscular tissues to relax and therefore expand and they're not squeezing on the blood vessels and excuse me if my biology is completely wrong but uh something like this they're not squeezing on the blood vessels so i'm not getting pins and needles and uh they're taking the pressure of of the system and the tension and so some pain disappears just because of organic biological relaxation um reasons uh so yes absolutely there's a level that that happens there and to start talking about emptiness just for that would be a complete uh misuse of the word emptiness and would just be you know easily dismissible but there is some of that going on there's an organic reality to it if you like an organic we can explain it in in real organic terms let's say um or in terms of real real organ organicity um secondly though is the level of the energy body so we the the level of physical body muscles and blood vessels and nerves and all the rest of it but then there's the level of the energy body and the energy body changes it almost like a definition of certainly the first four jhanas uh first five jhanas at least is there's changes in the energy body and the energy body says more homogeneous um more unified and has a different vibration but the energy body you know another way we could actually understand what the energy body is is that the energy body is a kind of a kind of reality that straddles the physical and the mental a kind of reality that straddles the physical strata of the cosmos and the mental so that um it spans those so that it is for instance susceptible to the mind state the mind state changes the energy body changes mind state is obviously a mental a mental factor it's it's extremely um susceptible and malleable through the mind and we talked about using the imagination why imagination is in the mind and the energy body experience the way the energy body is how the energy body is will uh will be affected by what's in the mind if i imagine this if i imagine that so we can we don't tend to think in these terms anymore in our culture probably back in medieval times there were certain uh strata of reality ontological categories that spanned both the physical and the mental the energy body is one of them so there's that level too and that's happening that's happening in jhana and that's happening when uh when a pain dissolves etc through meditation through jhana and there's a level of this playing with perception and and that the fact that actually the pain is unfabricating and it's empty and therefore can be it's malleable and therefore can be refabricated so there's all these three levels a kind of level of organic reality so to speak a level of energy body which spans physical and mental and the level of emptiness and playing with perception they're all they're all part of that experience okay so yesterday when we talked about bahia and this idea of bare attention which that sutta doesn't use those words bare attention nor are they anywhere in the pali can and nor to my mind is i don't even know what the pali would be for bare attention um but anyway um or even mindfulness the way people many people would understand what mindfulness is or in the past have understood what mindfulness is maybe it's changing now i don't know it's still despite kind of not being ultimate it's still we can if we if we fit it into this whole idea of a spectrum of fabrication then actually it just fits nicely at some point on the spectrum of fabrication when i'm engaging bare attention there are certain things i'm not adding to the experience i'm not adding a lot of papansha i'm not adding a lot of views and concepts and i'm not layering over that way that's probably how you've been taught about bare attention right not to lay so i'm doing a similar thing here when we talked yesterday about taking things out of the way of looking that are automatically there also in bare attention on mindfulness the stuff we're taking out um so it's a relatively skillful way of looking it's there's a modicum in it of a modicum of unfabrication or involves a modicum to a degree where we're fabricating less you understand the mistake would be to think that what we sense through bare attention is an unfabricated reality then i've approached this whole question of fabrication with a presupposition of where where unfabricating stops of what actually is real and is not do you understand it makes a huge difference i'll come back to this the concept that i've started with was limited it wasn't an open-ended investigation despite whatever rhetoric might be dressing it up in i've actually limited something i arrive at that limit and then i call it ultimate reality it's still very skillful though on this rope of unfabricating on this spectrum of unfabricating it's still somewhere it's just it's kind of more up this end but still relatively speaking less suffering less self less less all the rest of it okay okay so thinking thinking about the jhanas and their relationship to insight um i mentioned this phrase that i that i use it must be a more elegant phrase but i i call what i call after effects on perception and this to me is hugely significant this idea of the after effects of certain states of consciousness on our perception because those after effects imply something about the dependent arising of experience and they correspondingly they imply something about the emptiness of of our perceptions so these after effects as we move through more territory jhanically and in other kinds of states we uh there's a spilling over outside of the meditation into how we sense the world after effects on perception out there on the lawn out there on your walk whatever it is out there and uh with the lunch bowl in front of you whatever and they open new worlds and new experiences for us so usually um this becomes i'm mentioning it now i was humming and hiring whether to give the talk on the fifth jhana the realm of infinite space before i gave this one anyway i decided this way but usually this business about after effects on perception gets really really uh potent um with the formless jhanas but i tended to think it really the first kind of glimpses of it is with the third jhana and i mentioned that this sort of world of peace etc am i going too quickly you following me it's okay yeah um however the other day i got a lovely note this is actually a few days ago but um uh for some reason i hesitate to write these non-questions non-issue notes but since you seem to enjoy the one from earlier here's the epilogue so this is from our friend uh a friend of the radiant buddhas if you remember seeing everyone as radiant buddhas was so lovely so delightful that i was back in the second jhana by the time i made it outside i then spent 45 minutes wandering around the grounds and marveling at how everything everything seemed shot through with joy so the after effect on perception is basically the primary nimitta starts to color things things are colored things are seen uh that way i stopped in my tracks and mouthed wow at the sight of the old fruit crates piled by the outdoor loo the bins by the hermitage the hedge by the nun's graveyard the dead leaves on the path all of it radiant with happiness and light and something beyond something blessed and if that's not enjoyment well dot dot dot um so sometimes this is subtle and sometimes it's very powerful but our our uh and and can happen from not just jhanic states from all kinds of states i said usually you get the first glimpse of it in the third this person saying no earlier um but it gets very marked in the formless jhanas can have a very clearly you hear they're very uh profound and touching impress on on on the being on the sense of existence and if they're repeated enough if it's just a one-off you tend to think oh something was weird in my brain or something or you forget about it or it becomes just this thing that i don't quite know how to get back to but if it's repeated enough and they can come from lots of other non-jhanic states as well other perceptions other ways of looking going in and out of a normal perception and this kind of perception for example let's take from this person's note in and out in and out many many times at some point starting well which is the real way things are which is the real are they not shot through with joy the the universe is just uh purposeless and cold uh or very hot matter in in the in the neutonian sense or is there some way that joy is mystically woven in to the fabric of the cosmos that joy perhaps is the essence of things the divine essence of things or that there's a joy that shines through things a transcendent joy and that transcendent joy shines through this world of appearances this world that we call the world this world that we've so grown accustomed to sensing in other ways and disenchanted ways if one goes back and forth back and forth so many times which is actually real here which is real how do i know which mind state which way of looking reveals the way things really are do you have in in the states do you have what's called detention do you have that it's or or or lines you know what lines are um it's good that i've practiced a lot of equanimity um so years ago we did i think three years three years three years in in a row we did a retreat it was called loving kindness and compassion as a path to awakening something like that maybe some of you were even on it i think you know i can't remember maybe maybe a couple of others but years ago it was 2006 seven eight i think i can't remember one so so it was a it was also a three week or three and a half week retreat and first week did meta second week did compassion the third week after people had developed this kind of uh really by that point quite strong current of meta and compassion that was really there was people say you walk into meditation was like cutting the air so thick with love but um but after they had developed that stream then i gave them a practice of deliberately directing that meta and compassion not to beings self or others but to phenomena this sensation the sound this whatever is um uh this pain etc and i let them cook a little bit and then i came back and asked them did anyone notice that when you were doing that what it was you were directing meta to actually faded yes so there's there's almost a law here you know all this depend that's what the buddha calls it a dependent dependent rising is the law darman the word for dharma is law to trust this enough that it's like it's like putting a cake in the oven you go away you set the thing come back and will this have happened and for most people yes it's a law they faded then there's a question so or oftentimes here was a phenomenon a sensation and experience a perception when i direct the meta or compassion to it it fades it unfabricates it disappears to some degree or other and often completely amazing similar to the kinds of things we've talked about and then you ask okay how much meta reveals the real thing or the real sensation or the real self a little or a lot because meta is a skillful quality or it's kind of somewhere in the middle we've got to get exactly a medium amount will reveal the real way things are mindfulness as we said yesterday actually is a composite or it's all attention mindfulness is always with something else with lots of other things and those qualities that composite of qualities determine the fabrication the unfabrication the locking into a certain level of fabrication of whatever phenomenon the mindfulness is looking at now eric might like to say okay not mindfulness not my first equanimity because equanimity gives this sense of balance or whatever but we've already talked about that the more equanimity means the the less push and pull right that's what we've defined equanimity has less push and pull is the same as less clinging if i just practice that get more and more equanimous at a certain point we've touched we've said this already phenomena will fade how much clinging reveals the real object here's this phenomenon this pain this even a sight or a sound that's continuous or whatever how much clinging reveals the real object a lot a little none if it's none then where's the object because it's completely faded a medium medium amount so this is what we mean or another way of saying what we mean by something is empty i cannot privilege a certain amount of clinging or a certain amount of meta or certain amount of equanimity or what i cannot privilege any any particular way of looking or amount of what's wrapped up in the way of looking that to reveal the real way something is anything in other words it's empty it doesn't exist independently and there's no kind of zero point anywhere so like i said the formless uh when we get to the formless although clearly someone already had very strong experience maybe others also as well this after effects on perception um but when we get to the formless they start to kind of go up a notch in their in their power and what they can deliver in the world so they can open up in these after effects and the sense of things the way it can influence the sense of existence impact the sense of existence open up the very sense of the cosmos an interesting thing though for when you get there is that the the strength and even the impact of the after effect of perception is not actually predictable from the strength and degree of absorption of the meditation just before okay so i take that as good news so you'd think i got a really strong seventh jhana or whatever it is and then i go out there and i expect a really strong after effect maybe maybe not or i got there sort of it was in the neighborhood of the seventh jhana it wasn't really it wasn't really i was you know not quite consolidated or deep or whatever and i get up and afterwards the after effect is really strong so it's telling me something don't worry too much you know it's a sassy all over again yes i go for more absorption yes i go for more stadiums etc etc but there's no end to that and now we're adding and in terms of these after effects on perception which in again in terms of liberation the way i would conceive it which is a whole different sense of the cosmos a whole different sense of existence is what the awakened person knows how absorbed diameter any time in any sitting may not relate to how much opening there is afterwards in terms of the after effect on perception in the world the sense of the cosmos that opens up so to me that's good news i don't have to worry about it too much i've got a direction to go in but i'll be surprised by the fruits uh afterwards okay so we said one spectrum one spectrum of fabrication more or less one one way of viewing things and in a way like i said you can actually put the whole dharma in kind of the whole dharma can be seen as relating to or pertaining to or even emerging from that one understanding everything we talked about generosity same same deal you know things like they don't seem like they have to do with obvious ways of looking same deal um but to be less fabricated means less less is getting fabricated less is getting built there's less there in the perception so less solidity less substantiality going back to early retreats i'm saying well it looks like things are kind of almost like i could put my hands through the walls there's a perception of less solidity and less substantiality also to the body also to the energy body another way of saying that is there's more refinement right we've talked about this word refinement and i refine the refined cloth less substance less solidity or refining gold or flour or something you know there's less solidity there's a substance again something i've said before if i'm unsure with this new experience i've hit if i'm unsure is that the next jhana is that the next deepest jhana one probably almost more important clue than any other is is it more refined does its texture feel more refined which isn't the same as is it stronger or calmer or weaker is it more refined its actual texture is more refined there i think i'll come back to this another time what i'm going to say right now but i mention it now there's several suttas um i think i mentioned it yesterday um where the buddha talks about establishing ones i did mention it yesterday establishing oneself in a jhana any jhana and actually taking that jhana itself as an object on which to practice certain insight ways of looking um this is we'll come let's come back to it hopefully later in the retreat um in other words you hold that jhanic perception in attention the primary nimitta and everything else that's involved and very precisely in a very exact way you start removing um different kinds and levels of what i'm going to call clinging in relation to that jhana i use that word clinging to include also uh appropriation me mine or even me mine of the attention the attempt not just the giant the primary nimitta but also the attention being paid that's also not me not mine such as so clinging is a big is a big word i use it to mean that and and more but basically that's what you're doing with the jhana and it's helpful because it's a steady object it's very very steady and then and then you start taking things away so this is a kind of very advanced way of practicing but it's actually very powerful and very available for people who want to go down that road and develop it what happens when i do that what would we expect to happen if i do that on the first jhana p2 was yeah oh i think i'm hearing all the right things it will fade p2 will stop or it will go to the second jhana yeah all of the above so it could just go to the second jhana why because the second jhana is a less fabricated state if p2 fades completely something is fading and it will go to the third jhana if it fades completely but or just generally speaking it will fade but the spectrum again is all one thing so it will go down the spectrum of the jhana but this fading business is unfabricating business you know sometimes it's like being in an elevator and it just okay stops at every floor but sometimes you're just in an elevator it just goes whoosh and you've missed it's just gotten like oh everything's gone now um but the point is uh that there's an unfabricating going on and again that the the jhanic spectrum fits into this spectrum of unfabrication all right why why do things fade with an insight way of looking why do why is there less fabrication with an insight way of looking that's not a fair question you have to rely on some on some on something to explain something you have to rely on something else right to use it to explain it right so if we think about the 12 links of dependent origination how do we explain fading unfabricating based on the 12 links of dependent origination and where does that fit in where do you know where exactly um no this is all good so um you're everyone's right so um um so nama rupa is the fourth it's presented as an order but that's not a really helpful way of looking at it so the usually the first but it's the first in terms of it's the most fundamental is avijja which means delusion um the fourth one is nama rupa and nama rupa the buddha says involves different factors it includes vedana and perception the way i'm using the word perception going back to the beginning of the tree is synonymous with phenomenon experience appearance perception they're all the same thing clinging and craving come later they seem as if they come later when it's thought of linearly but it shouldn't be thought of linearly it should be thought of as a kind of uh i don't know what the word is completely inter interlinked web that's not a linear process in time and self seems to come really at the end with becoming and birth right if you think of the whole thing in a momentary way right but to think of the thing more as i said not not linear process in time not a process in time so much when i'm engaging an insight way of looking i'm we've always said what defines insight way of looking is clinging less craving less so it seems to come afterwards but if we don't think of it linearly it basically has an effect on the fabrication of self which seems to come later after craving clinging becoming birth that's where people usually put the self so you can see that less clinging less self is fabricated and then less dukkha and all the nasty stuff at the end that fits clear but it works as i said not linearly as well so it will work back to this what's actually the fourth link nama rupa of which one element is perception another perception another element is vedana so that decreasing clinging decreases they're not on off switches again they're there each one is a slider switch less clinging craving less self less dukkha less also nama rupa which means less perception and and vedna less experience and vedna there's a fading right avijja is the first link and as i said it's not the first in in a temporal process it's the first in terms of what the buddha said this is the fundamental problem everything rests on this in that sense um what's avijja avijja is a lot of things when i'm engaging or it has a lot of different levels when i'm engaging an insight way of looking you could say i'm engaging a view that has less avijja in it so when i going back to andy showed you this this example of seeing something sensing something as not me not mine to sense something as me or mine habitually unconsciously has more uh habitual ignorance delusion avijja in it than to sense it as me or mine does that one could you understand no so let's take two let's contrast two ways of looking okay one is the the normal way of looking that we have in 99 of our states of consciousness that it's always something is me mine or this pain is me mine or this pleasure is me mine or whatever it's always me mine i'm not thinking it but it's just there me mine yeah that's one the buddha calls that appropriation it's based on a self-view he calls it avijja when i engage an insight way of looking for example anatta i'm actually looking not me not mine so you could say what i've done there is take away that particular element that particular level of avijja which usually sees as me or mine yeah so avijja again it's not an on off switch is how if it's all like water in some kind of plumbing system less avijja now that won't work well drain less avijja in any moment in in a way of looking means less perception means and it also means less clinging and less self do you understand so this is mapping this understanding onto the 12 links of dependent origination they're not on off switches they're just like if you put a lot of avijja in your way of looking you're going to get a much more fabricated perception much more clinging craving much more suffering much more self-sense if i take away a lot of avijja let's say i've got it half full whatever that is then i'm going to get half of my you know being silly but um less perception less suffering less clinging less self yeah if i if i get a video really really low so that's another way an insight way of looking can work it's not so much by relaxing clean actually by changing avijja in the moment i'm taking away again i think i'm doing but i'm actually non-doing i'm taking away the habitual avijja that's programmed or or habitual in my way of looking at any point does it make sense this how all this fits together with dependent arising and this to me again is what's the buddha pointing at when he talks what's the most important thing the buddha's pointing at when he when he gives this teaching map dependent arising we can get deeper deeper into it than that but that's that's enough for now and what one finds is that uh with a lot of this and especially with the formless realms but is that a specific insight way of looking kind of goes with a specific jhana or if i practice a specific insight way of looking it leads to a specific jhana and a specific jhana opens me up to a specific insight way of looking so a very good example of this is the seventh jhana the realm of nothingness the realm of no thingness so that after i emerge after one emerges from the seventh jhana from the realm of no thingness if the after effect on perception is reasonably strong one can be moving around and looking around and recognizing there are things but there's a kind of more compelling sense that these things are not really things the thingness of them is an illusion there are no things so that the jhana in its after effect of perception has uh delivered an insight that there are no things but one can also work the other way around if in meditation i sit down and or stand or whatever it is walk and i engage the way of looking no thing there are no things everything is a dependent rising or everything is fabricated in this way it will take me to the seventh jhana so in specific insight specific jhana they correspond and and the causality so often is the case works both ways or the eighth jhana one might emerge from that and one of the senses one can have it's called neither perception or non-perception one of the after effects on perception is all this is just it's just a perception it's just a perception and again one could take that view just a perception and engage it repeatedly in in the meditation and i just sustain that view on all phenomena just a perception just a perception it will take me to the eighth jhana specific insight corresponding jhana yeah so it gets qualified a little bit by um if if you've never spent time in any of those genres but you but you really engage that practice everything depends on i can just you know i could teach um my little niece when she's five just just look at everything and just say no thing no thing or whatever it's empty of dependent rising empty of inherent existence just say empty of inherent existence it's not going to take it to the seventh jhana but if you if you um if you understand what that means and very very delicately very very subtly it's not a big cogitation thing we're really talking a very subtle delicate beautiful way of looking i understand what that means so that when i say no thing it's got all my understanding wrapped up in in the way of looking very very subtly very agile if i understand it even if i haven't gone to the seventh jhana it will take me to the seventh jhana if i've gone to the if let's say um it if i practice uh let's say anatta not me not mine i understand that one okay i don't quite understand there's no thing this thing but i understand not me not mine i know i know what that means i can make it work if i do that and i've already been to the seventh jhana then the not me not mine may well take me to the seventh jhana but if i haven't gone to the seventh jhana before it it may well not you know so in other words sometimes what happens is people open up from these things as far as they can go but with training actually you can kind of if they go together the jhana training insight training you can kind of uh you know stop the elevator you press the button on the elevator i want to get off at floor seven or whatever um do you make sense yeah um so you know usually we think of insight as something we get you're meditating you're being mindful and you get an insight even though i now you really get the fact of impermanence at another level and that's a good way of thinking about insight um but this way of thinking about insight insight as ways of looking insight is something we do we actively decide to perceive in a certain way to look in a certain way um once it gets a certain level you know there's a way that what we're engaging is is provisional truths if you like a certain degree of less avijja so even this thing about no thing is not quite an ultimate truth it's it's pretty deep it but it's a still a provisional truth and what you're really doing is engaging a provisional truth as a way of looking and through the jhana you're gaining access to that level of provisional truth of skillful skillful uh opening perception is that okay if there's a bit more um so jhanas then are as we said resource huge resources in all these ways that we've that we've talked about before um as well as providing you know both indirect and direct insight um and even the second jhana you know we talked to i think i mentioned earlier on the retreat you know just to know and really know firsthand that happiness that degree of happiness and that much happiness and that depth of happiness is available and is not um dependent necessarily on um getting something from the external world or from someone else that's an insight you know and we also talked very brief about the relationship between letting go of aversion and the arising of happiness so that's also part of the insight there or in the third and fourth jhanas the fact that that kind of peace that kind of stillness really happens when we let go of push and pull so all this is this kind of insight wrap uh woven in to to jhanic jhanic openings so jhanas what can we say they loosen attachments and they relativize objects for us meaning our usual sense our usual perspectives and beliefs about things in the world about objects about things that we can get they certainly relativize as we're just talking about the second jhana they they relativize the the pleasure that we can get from sense objects because uh leaving aside the soul-making teachings of sensing the soul there's there's no way that one would get that degree of happiness that you get in the second jhana from any sense any central object it's just of a different order as we said on earlier on the retreat in time or later on or more and more in time they um they relativize the nature of objects too or the relative nature of objects too so we start so all these perceptions open up these insight ways of looking these provisional truths and we start to see a thing is a thing it's also not a thing so my my very relation my very sense of something is different when when i've seen that so not just the relative pleasure of something but actually the relative nature of something becomes uh well more relativized so soul-making dharma just very briefly is dependent as i said right at the beginning on this understanding of emptiness and the flexibility of um the idea of the potential flexibility of ways of looking that's at the basis of soul-making dharma and soul-making dharma for those of you who are into it um also leads to that it opens up more flexibility and it calls into question the whole idea that there is a fixed way things are this is like this and that's like that and that's just how it is with soul-making dharma is another way you can pry that open and it breaks open the whole idea that something is this way or that way in itself so both insight into emptiness and also the jhanas they they in a way they they the way we the way i would teach it they depend on our willingness to play with perception depend on our willingness to be malleable with perception but they deliver for us they open up for us a malleability of perception both the insight work into emptiness and the jhanic work and and you know we talked about that with pain and some of you have been experimenting with this and been almost startled you know at what's possible with unpleasant sensations that they can become they can become petey or happiness um what about the mind foggy mind dull mind agitated mind to the degree that i know that it's empty that's also a perception i have a perception of a mind state it's a perception everything's a perception just a perception and knowing that it's empty uh means the implication of knowing that it's empty means that it's malleable it's not a fixed thing the mind state too so that's maybe at some point something one can experiment with too i've seen it with physical pain unpleasantness can i also see the mind state in that way it's flexible and then shape it so i i don't know i i would probably say that all jhanas um um open up for us or deliver for us a kind of more intuition and intuitive capacities and sometimes that's related to creativity like poems and music and whatever else you know there's something in the jhana it's almost like they become sources of creative or potentially become sources of creativity or creative openings um in intuition let's say um but also intuition regarding insight so again one of the blessings of jhana in regard to insight is that it opens up our capacity uh for intuition in the realm of insight yeah intuitive our intuitive uh seeing and grasping of of things insight i would still say though other factors are more important so no matter how much intuition etc seems like it's opening up intuition regarding insight um from jhana experience i would still say that gets trumped by what our conceptual framework of the dharma is and what our conceptual framework of insight is that will be more important and if that's uh limited it will limit what insight is possible no matter how much the jhanic opening and how much it feels like yeah i'm super intuitive and i must be really seeing reality and all that so the question comes back to is my conceptual conceptual framework for insight or of insight is my conceptual framework of dharma actually big enough helpful enough will it lead me because it should the conceptual framework should actually lead me to more insights or actually does it hinder and limit and that will trump any sense of intuitive opening or or whatever from the jhana we talked about um three ways it's possible to get attached to jhana it's the last point now um but when we went into those three ways attached the pleasure attached to the sort of self grandiosity or attached to view actually as we investigated each one we we we i kind of suggested that actually it's more likely that they the jhana experience repeated experience of jhana releases attachments including attachments to certain insight views and i gave the example of the sixth jhana and just the fact that a one experiences something beyond that infinite consciousness one experiences the seventh jhana and the eighth jhana just that and the fact that it's in the map um both the map and the experience and the conceptual framework and the experience helps me go beyond so i don't get too entrenched and too attached to such a view if my conceptual framework and i might not even be someone who thinks i have a conceptual framework because i don't like conception or i think it's intellectual or i think it's not the real deal or i'm whatever um i do have a concept you do everyone has a conceptual framework it might be conscious semi-conscious or relatively unconscious it might be coherent or incoherent it might be muddled or not it might be mixed with whatever but you can't not have a conceptual framework i would say but if my conceptual framework for example says something like this vastness of awareness that lovely opening that i was describing other way precious opening that sounds like emptiness when i hear talk about emptiness it sounds like that that sounds like the ultimate when i hear talk about the ultimate that sounds like the nature of mind when i hear talk about the nature of mind is the sort of ultimate thing that one wants to open to or the nature of awareness that sounds like rigpa if you know the vajrayana teachings that sounds like when the When the Buddha talks about consciousness without limit, without feature, that sounds like the radiant mind or whatever that I've heard the Buddha talk about or other teachers talk about or read about or whatever, etc., especially when we get into Vajrayana teachings. The language can get quite confusingly similar and not differentiated enough really as sign posts. If I've got that kind of conceptual framework and I experience this vastness of awareness and I've got no further or deeper experience than that vastness of awareness, nor have I got any way, any way. I not only don't have the experience, but I've got no way of going beyond that experience of vastness of awareness. No way of going further. I wouldn't know how to try to go further. None of that fits into my conceptual framework. My conceptual framework doesn't support any of that or doesn't suggest how. Then I'm limited and maybe trapped and maybe forced into a kind of attachment to a certain view, entrenched. To use the Buddha's words. But that doesn't have to be the case, obviously. If I have a conceptual framework that actually can keep going beyond these things and partly the jhanas can be part of that and they're woven into the same conceptual framework, then, and this isn't for everyone, but some people will say, oh, that makes sense and it allows more. There's more potency there, there's more distance, there's more depth potential there. Less likelihood of getting entrenched in a certain view of anything as ultimate or of this is how things are, this is the reality of X or Y. And that's what an awakened person knows. Okay. Let's sit quietly together for a bit. Okay. Okay. Okay. So I don't know how all this lands. Don't worry if it doesn't all, as I said at the beginning, if it doesn't make complete sense right now, maybe that that's the case, but it may still be even though it doesn't make sense that there's some kind of sense of beauty there or something that calls you or draws you, maybe, maybe not, of course, some perfume, some sense of possibility. Maybe that's the important thing, if it feels like it doesn't quite make sense. Maybe that's there. Okay. Okay. Okay. Thank you, everybody. Time for tea. Enjoy. Please consider supporting DharmaSeed with a year-end gift. Your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all. Visit DharmaSeed.org-slash-donate to learn more. And thanks.

 a period of questions open if anyone would like to ask. I have a question about primary limiters and you've talked about satellite states a few times. Last night as I was practicing with my base practice it didn't feel like there were primary limiters of PT or sukha around initially just with the base practice. Then after a while I noticed a sense of physical well-being in the body which didn't exactly feel like PT as I'd been used to and it didn't really feel like happiness either. It was more of a physical, gentle, calm. That was what was around so I tried to absorb into it and that worked to some degree. There was quite a lot of absorption into that state. It didn't feel like jhanic in the ways that other states have felt before. I started thinking is this some kind of satellite state? Do all of the jhanas have satellite states? I also thought perhaps this is another kind of PT which I haven't, it's a sense of physical well-being but it just didn't fit the box of how I've conceived of PT before. Also some questions around primary limiters so that you've encouraged us that that needs to be the primary limit and needs to be what we want to be focusing on in jhana practice. I began to wonder why is that? If love is one of the characteristics of the second jhana for example, what happens? Why do you not encourage people to focus on those aspects? Then also some questions around soul making where you talk about an infinitude of qualities that we can theoretically absorb into. That was not one question but just an exploration of those themes. How nice was it? It was nicer than any hindrances. I think it could have been a bit brighter perhaps, though it felt a little bit sort of low energy maybe. The pleasure could have been brighter? The pleasure or the state? Yeah, the state itself. It doesn't sound like when to fuss over is it, isn't it? It doesn't sound jhanic. The nature of the PT will change over time and it will certainly change as I said after you've gotten more into the third, fourth etc. They really have an effect on the PT. But the PTs have an effect but it's still really yummy. It's not just they make it kind of like. It's really nice, it's just different. It's mellow out but really nice. Yes, probably there are, we could talk about satellite states or states in the neighborhood. I'm not sure I would call that a satellite state or state in the neighborhood. I'll talk hopefully in the next few days about different kinds of satellite states where they're really like there's this very clear amazing state and there's this very clear amazing state and there's this very clear amazing state and there they have some things really in common as if they're part of a larger constellation. In a way what it sounds like you're talking about is something just where some of the jhana factors are a little bit gathered together but not really in a way that they're really blossoming. I don't know strictly speaking I would call that satellite state but it's in a certain territory. The question practically then is is this fruitful to hang out in that? Obviously compared to papansha and compared to whatever else it's skillful, it's fruitful. Is it going to be fruitful in the way that I can hang out in it and the way that I'm hanging out with it allows it to blossom into an actual jhana state of say peacefulness or something like that. That takes, as I said when I talked about the third jhana, it's a much safer bet to go through the happiness and really drink and it's not to say that it's impossible the other way with just there's this kind of nice calm feeling. It's not that it's impossible and it's worth playing with and trying but generally speaking it will be more the other way from a really ripe full fleshy satisfaction. It didn't feel like how I would think the third jhana would feel. It wasn't refined in that way. It was sort of the similar level of refinement as pete. Yeah exactly. Just without the sort of movement and energy. It doesn't sound at all like the third jhana and so a lot of people would be very common. We've talked about this several times now to mistake a kind of sense of calmness, maybe even one that they're familiar with, deep peacefulness, very quiet mind, etc. for that territory but the question is whether the way that I'm being with it can refine it. So it didn't feel refined but the question is can I be with it in a way that refines it? It is possible but that's going to depend on a lot of things. Partly it will depend on if I really have a lot of experience with the third jhana then the chances of a state like that refining into the third jhana are much, much higher. If I don't really have much experience with the third jhana the chances of a state and I mean the real third jhana deal. If I don't have much experience with that then the chances of a state like that refining and ripening just through careful, it's not impossible but it's not very high. Rather it's much more likely to ripen through the second jhana etc. and that real fullness and really, really getting into it. As for the other secondary nimiters, none of this is black and white. Of course there's a lovely love there, of course you're going to want to explore that and it's just that if you make that your primary thing it won't then it will ripen in something else. It will go in a different direction. What we pay attention to is what gets amplified but it also then sets a direction. That's the reason. If we were on a retreat about exploring matter and different heart openings and different kinds of love and that kind of thing then of course we would do that. Because we're on a jhana retreat it's really something to keep this intention. It's like okay this is my road. Yes there are lots of interesting things at the side of the road and I can explore all that but I need to remember this is my road if we want to develop the jhanas. As to soul making, there's an infinitude. What was the question with that? There's an infinitude of different states and lovely things and different openings. I guess the question is that we're selecting in the jhana path there's a very specific trajectory which you're just talking about. And then there's a curiosity of what are the outcomes? How does it unfold if one begins to absorb into these other qualities? Like sometimes in the second jhana there's a sense or just in the sitting there's a sense of nobility for example and then that would be more of an imaginal practice of taking that as an object or feeling the resonance of that. It may or may not be a fully imaginal practice. It could just be an energetic practice. So we did a thing on the opening evening and just getting in touch with the sense of devotion. Do you remember that? Something like that is very skillful. Lawrence mentioned working with anger then it goes to power. So those things are emotional, energetic practices, transformations. They don't necessarily need to be imagined. For something to be imagined it involves a lot of different things happening. Yet all of these fruits are there but like I said it's what do we want to do? And it's not better or worse because for some person actually being able to feel into their devotion that's connected with their desire that way and actually feel it in the energy body and let that empower them, that's huge. For another person like what Lawrence was talking about the ability to be with an anger in a way that's not fragmenting the being, driving the crazy, hurting everyone around them, toxic etc. to actually distill that in the alchemical vessel, actually let's not use that word, distill that energetically, emotionally and find the power and strength there that everything coheres around it and then sit in that and act from there, speak from there, be from there, perceive from there. That's huge. Those things are huge. So again we have to really get clear what is the larger context of what we're doing here and to me the larger context of what we're doing here as I said in the opening it sits within all these other practices and feeds and complements all of them and is fed and complemented by all of them but it's also distinct and if we're walking down this road there's all sorts of look at that lovely pair on that tree and look at that over there and it's fantastic in the context of our larger life of practice, yes we can go and go to that and then there's a side road down where the apple orchard is or whatever it is, brilliant but Jhanas won't deepen unless that intention is really this is my road, this is my road, this is my road. It doesn't mean you can't have a few apples and pears on the way but there's something about keeping it that way to deepen in Jhanas. But yeah there's more potential riches and openings than anyone can ever experience in their whole lifetime whoever you are and that's the thing especially when you get talking about soul, no I mean that when we talk about soul making so there's things that are just kind of part of what I would call basic Dharma training by which I mean things like working with anger that way, things like being able to be with my get a sense of my nobility and that's energized in the heart and it affects my sense of self and it affects my life, things like being with the sense of devotion and letting that empower, things like working with the emotions, emptiness, all that and that's all kind of a very large plate of stuff to get through in terms of basic Dharma practices, very possible but once you get to soul making it becomes infinite. By the nature of what the soul making dynamic does it will always create new openings, new states, new perceptions, new territory, new beyonds, new, it will create and discover new aspects of reality which and then so there's a kind of distinction there but I guess what I was just calling the sort of the tray or the play of basic Dharma practice it's probably quite wide compared to maybe compared to some other sort of presentations but it's definitely possible and that's something that one can do in a lifetime. Soul making you'll never get to the end of it, emptiness you can get to the end of, Jhana etc but does that make sense? Yes, thank you. Maybe just not a question but a request earlier on in the retreat you were saying that you were going to talk about soul making and the relationship of that to the Jhana as you mentioned you had something and then. Not as a big topic certainly not but maybe it was one little thing which I've probably noted somewhere to come later but not as a whole big thing. I don't think so, it would be too much, yeah. I wanted to ask about the difference between PT and Suka. I got more used to PT yesterday and today and it really opened almost opens up like like an egg shape around the body that kind of pulsates in the same texture vibration when it felt it was becoming more subtler and more refined in a way and if I compare this to the Suka which is still very wild and like I have to laugh sometimes like loud and I don't feel this Suka is more refined as the PT and I just wanted to make sure if this is still something that can happen. Do you mean by refined karma? No. Okay. Maybe it could be a language barrier I thought about this as well I thought about this this clove that gets more fine. After which? So what you're using for refinement the word refinement in German would be? Siner. Like in English, finer right? Yeah, okay. I don't know I mean all I can say is it's early days yet and that's the thing about these post-it notes. So it may be that at first the experience of the Suka is just of a certain bandwidth of Suka with a lot of bubbliness which it sounds like and I don't quite know from your description what you're describing as PT so the egg-shaped thing should be there in every Jhana because that's just part of what it is to have an extended energy body and as the Buddha says pervading and permeating and pervading, saturating. So that's neither here nor there that goes with anything. It is very much the case that there is a whole bandwidth for each Jhana so there's a bandwidth of PT in terms of refinement, possibility and even calmness etc. and also with the Suka. So just from what you've said it's hard to say but I think it's good just to keep the exploration open. So as you get more into the Suka and more into what you're calling PT maybe it starts to get clearer what the differences are and you can discern a little bit. Other than that from what you said I'm not quite sure what else to say. They're both nice. Yeah. Yeah, great. So no problem there. Just keep exploring and it's almost like the more familiar we become with the kind of states we tend to open up into the more we visit them the more it becomes clearer what the distinctions are for us and maybe that's all that needs to happen really at this point. Okay. Yeah, I just wanted to make sure if I'm still on the right track. Very probably you are but you know again I would say provisionally from a teaching point of view if you think oh have I now gone in my first genre have I skipped and I'm calling something that's actually the beginnings of the third genre am I still calling that the first genre and then I'm calling the Suka something else. Do you see what I mean? If that's a concern though I would check with the emotion because the emotion in the Suka is going to be primarily this very warm tender exquisite peacefulness or satisfaction or whatever it is depending on the level. But you're shaking your head so it sounds like it's not bad. No the emotion is clear it's more the refinement that I was concerned about. Okay yeah so I don't know other than just hang out in both you know lots and lots and hopefully it will get clear it should get clear yeah but you know don't rush all these things probably everyone's got kind of post-it notes still at this point and that's appropriate you know things mature things change we notice different territories we notice more as time goes on yeah so it's all it it's basically it's really nice you're enjoying it and it's just asking you to get more and more familiar with it and then it will it will get clearer. Okay yeah yeah thank you yeah sure there was some here Andy yeah. So I have a question about going from second to third sometimes it feels like especially if it's come from quite a kind of bubbly end of second the one I get into third it's like coming from a really bright place into a darkened room where like it's kind of hard first as to make out you know the kind of the nuances of third because it's like okay right it feels peaceful but there's I haven't yet seen the kind of the crystal clarity or the tenderness or the divinity or those qualities and I found that sometimes I actually end up in a space a bit like what you were saying which is not really what I thought it was yeah so it's like okay well that's not it's not quite the kind of deep dark pool of third so yeah what would you recommend at that point it's just better to go back or try and refine. You could go back because yeah probably that place that you're describing that's not quite it is is is as I said one of these not hangovers but habit results of your insight practice over the years you know it's a state of relative equanimity and quietness and the mind has got quite used to that so you're ending up in that. So one thing you could do is come back to the second and maybe maybe you could even start feeling the drinking of the happiness as satisfying as a verb in in present tense you understand and maybe that will take you for instance to the then satisfied so you're you're tuning a little bit more to something more more specific yeah does that that's more related to the third yeah so that's one option another option might be or should be with time that you can you know a lot of this again it just starts to become memory and subtle intention so that what you're remembering and again if it feels mature if it's at that point where it's actually mature to do this you're actually remembering the whole set of qualities of the third genre that whole gorgeous realm like exquisite using divine and that sort of those sort of words you're actually remembering that flavor and you bring that you actually go there but try going there by memory you know of those things yeah so does that make sense yeah so it's really it's really a realm that you're remembering almost as opposed to just hanging out because there's because you've been practicing so long it's probably a lot of momentum and habitual momentum to get into these other states that are you know we've been saying relatively skillful relatively equanimous relatively peaceful relatively non eventful etc they're all it's all good but if you if you if you want to make sure you don't bypass you know bypass the actual third genre which by this point you can see the quality of difference is you know quite marked then then you then you have to have to aim a little more yeah either in the process of the second genre with the satisfying satisfying you see see what you're doing there you're actually inclining the mind towards a certain emotion in the present whose fulfillment is the third genre don't make sense yes or as I said you're remembering a whole realm or other aspects of the realm apart from the fact that there's equanimity and peace there you know the the does that make sense and you can it may not be ready for that but it but it may be getting there you know what we have to see but that's part of the whole mastery deal and and you can maybe remember that when it's going well in the second genre you can maybe just lightly subtly intend to remember that okay does it yeah no that's really helpful good um just one more thing about um so uh yesterday I was sitting with a really bright bubbly quite silly actually happiness in in in second and just really enjoying it and then suddenly this spontaneous not me not mine came out of it just completely from nowhere it was really surprising and so then I had this happiness that wasn't about anything and didn't belong to anybody and it had this kind of it was just really wonderful magical um just like wow that's and I just wanted to know whether there was anything worth exploring that or whether I should shelve that for later um I think that probably to some to some degree or other or other um there is less self-identification with the happiness in the territory of the second genre so usually when we're happy um it's connected to a story and quite a more fabricated sense of self who is feeling very happy about something or other and there's a whole projection in time and with one's life and and all that's going even if I'm not thinking thinking thinking that's all there it's all being fabricated to a certain extent the self and and then taking this happiness personally does this make sense in the second genre naturally the which I'll get to in the next couple of days um the self is as we go through the genres the self is less and less fabricated maybe modify that statement at some point but there's less and less fabricated so in the second genre there's very little personality there's very little story there's very little background history and where I'm going and what I want and the whole the whole rest of it yeah there's even very little psychological history kind of it's just happiness so already to a certain extent there's there's a kind of to some degree or other there's a sort of it's not it's not me or mine in the same way that it would be for the usual sense of self do you understand so it might be just that you're part this is something we kind of notice as it goes on anyway and but because it's a little less identified then it lends itself more to to being seen as less identified and you have a history of not me not my practice of anatta of disidentifying so it just kind of piggybacks on that if um or rather it's available as a practice and again I hope to talk about this at some point and maybe even a few times on this retreat we turn an insight way of looking onto a jhana or say this way the jhana itself or the primary nimitta becomes an object for an insight way of looking so that I wouldn't recommend that to anyone at this point okay it's a whole other level of skill and art and but one can then regard this or that jhana the whole thing or one aspect of it as not me not mine not me not mine and that becomes a super powerful practice if you stay you have to stay with it stay with it stay with it and see what happens but I wouldn't do that before jhana before you really know that jhana inside out and it's really got established again if you if you do that too early so to speak you risk being the foolish and experienced cow kind of thing that the buddha was talking about it will probably just slide over all over without kind of knowing where you are and then you might lose control so we really want the jhana itself to be consolidated thoroughly familiar thoroughly steady and established and then for some people they can start doing their insight ways of looking on the jhana itself and that as I said is a both very lovely but super powerful way of practicing but I will talk try and talk more about that another time yeah thanks yeah good good so mica that one yeah yeah thank you um I have a quick technical question um about steadiness and enjoyment what to do when it seems that when I emphasize steadiness I start to lose uh somehow the capacity to enjoy and when I emphasize enjoyment I lose my steadiness and and mind gets starts easier easier uh easily wandering uh they they seem somehow close each one out um to some extent uh so what could be what exactly happens when you emphasize the enjoyment um when why well um my way to emphasize enjoyment generally is uh to open and open and open to the enjoyment and really let go and somehow fall into the lap of say happiness or peaty or something or really like let go and let the whole consciousness and and energy body sense open and and I just fall somehow into the arms of of the nimitta um I've wondered if this really opening opening opening strategy is actually causing some like I'm opening it's kind of like too much well um yeah thank you for saying that so this is so individual and can change with time but just immediately when you say that um it sounds like you you know you can't open too much but what you can do is open too much relative to how much you can't open too much and how much probing you're doing yeah so there's no there's no end to how much you can open I don't think there is we're infinitely infinitely deep human beings we can just open and open but relative to how much penetration and probing you're doing that so that when you can hear it in in the way your language it mikau when you're doing that you're kind of going into quite a passive mode yeah and that's the problem okay whereas when you're penetrating and probing with the intention the agenda of enjoying then it's really like your they go together the the enjoyment and the sustaining go together you understand so it sounds like in for you right now in the mix of things upping the penetrative probing with the enjoyment yeah in in the mix um for other people for a lot of people you know it's more opening that needs to happen I said this already people can think oh but but I am opening but actually they're not one isn't opening as much as one could but one's so used to only a limited amount of opening in the being that one thinks well I'm opening but actually there's more opening to be able to do there so all this is very individual but if you keep in mind you know there's lots of modes of attention but if you keep in mind these two sort of principles of one's a bit more yang if you like and one's a bit more yin one's a bit more active one's a bit more passive or receptive if you just keep that in mind and the necessity to play with both and to move around then the question becomes well there may not be questions all going fine or it might be like am I overdoing it a little bit right now on one or the other and right now might be you know for this six months I've gotten into a habit of overdoing on one side or the other or it might be just in this moment or this five minutes or whatever does that make sense yeah so when when you when you probe there's no there's no um uh mutual exclusivity between enjoying and sustaining you if I'm just I'm probing trying to enjoy to the max I wouldn't I will obviously try and sustain it's like of course but if I go into too receptive a mode then everything gets a bit loose and it's almost I expect I expect you know I'm not doing any work I'm not I'm not really working there I'm expecting everything to happen yeah but again this is an answer I'm giving you right now and for someone else it might be that what's needed is is the other one and oftentimes without without realizing it or recognizing that's what's needed yeah thank you um would you say generally that steadiness arises out of the balance of opening and probing when when when it really hits the sweet spot of opening and probing at the moment at the limit at the context of the practice that's where the steadiness arises not sure feel a bit hesitant to say that um the pro the probing and the opening thing is a very fluid responsive sort of un-unformulaic thing so really we were just saying the most general thing like don't don't don't neglect one for the sake of the other you know so I'm not sure there's a sweet spot per se it's not as as much as just you know the whole that whole movement is not only going to help sustaining it's going to help deepening it's going to help absorbing it's going to help all kinds of things it's just it's if you go back to the buddha's original image of or rather the image for the the soap uh mix her with the first genre you know it's quite active you're kind of mixing something there's something about moving between those modes it's also part of mixing and and in a way that applies to the other genres as well in a way or or at a much subtler level so I don't know that's just about sustaining as much as the whole the whole show is just um worked better it's like needing needing bread you know working it in the flour and uh yeah all right thank you yeah um is that nick back there yeah it's just um related to part of that question about the um um probing and the receptivity I mean you just called it passive as well as the more active um being within the meter so I've just really noticed like I'm naturally I'm just much more receptive that's where my that the opening comes much more naturally so with the PT it's really opening to that and I've been really trying to um yeah develop a sense of what what the probing is like it's it's it's unfamiliar to me um and what I found like several times when I've so I've taken a part of the energy body which has felt particularly strong in PT and really put my concentration there and and probe that and what tends to happen like immediately that it open there's an opening and the so the um the sense in the energy body then is the probing goes almost immediately into a and and it's like the sensation there just opens right up quite big um and I feel like I've lost the probing already and I don't know if this is just because I'm not very good at it yet or if that's something that happens when you probe into anything it there's space in there and that's what you kind of fall into so I'm I'm yeah a little bit confused a little bit confused about how to work with that yeah thank you um yeah it's I think it's very normal and and that's where you use that image of like imagine someone diving into a lake and that's a probing movement that body becomes kind of streamlined in its shape if they're if you're diving and not just sort of splattering into the lake um if you're diving there's this streamlined probing of one point in the water but then very quickly you find yourself surrounded by water the whole you aimed at a point but then it got then it was like oh now I'm in a new territory so that may happen as you're describing very quickly or it may happen at some point when you're probing um very normal but then you can just do the same thing again so it's not like you're getting it wrong you can just okay same again same again same again and it's not like right same again immediately quick don't don't lose any time you know it's it the whole thing's just like what what you know what feels helpful right now and so if it feels good great and then you may try doing doing it again and again and again uh or you may at some point switch to a more open mode you know so there's not you know it's not that we're trying to kind of eliminate any or any gaps in the in the probing or or any do you understand if if it's opening that way something is working does this make sense yeah yeah it does um does it mean that you can't like you can't sustain the probe in one area that it just won't sustain and but you you can go back a bit later and probe somewhere else it or can you stay well much more let's let's take this person who dives into a lake yeah they dive and and and they dive and then they're underwater and it's all around them they could if they want just keep going in the same direction within they're in a bigger space but they could just keep going in the same direction it's something like that yeah that their their perception is of a rather than a spot that they're aiming at um aiming to dive right in that spot in the water um their perception is now it's 3d around me you know but i can keep going in the same direction it's more like a direction yeah yeah yeah something like that yeah yeah thank you um nicole uh jason nicole do you want to toss the coin um i'm wondering about the kind of spectrum between pt and suka because um i've been exploring the really really subtle fine end of pt like where it's just like just really beautiful tiny explosions and loving it and then when there are times and i'm less familiar with the suka um but there are times when i'm in that bubbly really bubbly energy that that feels much more um has much more um pt in it than say the fine end of pt does and i've been kind of playing with cross-fading pt and suka and so it seems it's almost like pt has this is here like if that's the pt spectrum and then like the second jana spectrum is here as though you can almost go finer in pt than you might at the top of the second of the second jana does this make sense or not quite and i couldn't quite see what you're doing with your hands there but um no it's okay can i say say something and see if it if it helps and if not we'll try again yeah okay um yeah so there is a spectrum of refinement across all the janas i said the eighth jana is just unbelievably refined you know compared to well actually compared to any of the others but compared to the first certainly um and so there's that spectrum of refinement then there's a spectrum of a refinement um well again it's maybe these words subtlety and refinement that get a bit a bit confused so i would probably say it's not so much it's there's a spectrum of um let's use the word calming and refinement differently and and what gets confusing is maybe the word subtlety so that there's a speck there's a spectrum of calm uh calming suka for instance through the second jana you know and there's a there's a spectrum of calming the peacefulness and the suka in the third jana as it gets towards the fourth jana you know all that in the first jana it's like yeah although pete has a large range in a way it's not that the deeper end of pete has a subtler has a subtler or a more refined pete so that's what if i said anything i probably wasn't that clear because i think these words are getting slightly overlapped and confused and i'm perhaps not being consistent with using them the thing about subtle pete is just that if that's all there is then we need to be good with that and be able to work with it um and kind of really okay with that yeah no i've been loving subtle pete i feel it's like incredibly okay can i just say one more thing so so what so that's all we need to do if you're loving it and you can work with it and you can get into it and great fine tick you know you've passed that particular thing and generally speaking then is like if i've got all the other elements of mastery of pete then i really want to just be getting into the pete no matter how strong is until it just goes to the second jana rather than keeping it a subtle uh or what you calling refined state you understand it's like let's just do this thing until it until it um gives birth to the sukha and then and then we're going with the sukha does that make sense yeah that makes sense it was yeah it was more of it was kind of like a nerdy question more than a problem really which was because that i think that happened and i can tell the difference of refinement and the quality between the pita and the sukha they feel the bodily sensation of them feel yeah different and that seems clear to me it just seems like there's um yeah it's like like there's um yeah go ahead um there is probably all kinds of like nerdy your word um corners we could get interested in and all that but um in terms of like okay what do we want to do on this retreat you know um it may well be it's time for the second and really really ripening into that and really getting into that and then maybe sometime later you can come back and explore this uh level you know in terms of priorities of of yeah so um yeah it may well be and and there's all kinds of interesting things that's great but just in terms like setting our priorities it might be that it's right now and and this would be a kind of you're just holding yourself back a little bit unnecessarily and we want to kind of move on so that sounds like to me but yeah yeah okay I I've developed two habits in my um working with PT that I wanted to check out with you and just make sure I'm not veering off of course the first is um because the I think I'm not so good at probing without probing too hard and kind of turning it into kind of uh what was the word the Buddha used snatch snatch yeah I I find myself kind of like like micro probing just for a second like pleasure over here pleasure over there pleasure over here uh and what what can the being do to maximize it just for a split second here there does that feel like a suitable substitute should I work on the way you describe it more I would my intuition would be no it probably wouldn't really cohere that way and it would be much more useful and probably useful in your life as well um to be able to really sustain a kind of probing intensity without it kind of being too tight okay you know so there's a jarnik skill here but there's probably a mirroring on a life level of also like what is it to really be able to focus on something and sustain that effort and sustain intensity without it being problematic you know um but really having said what my intuitive sense would be I would I should have first said well how does it work does it work well does it it has resulted in jhana okay first jhana a few times but not so consistent or it feels like it's probably the most useful thing so far but I haven't had a whole lot of I don't feel super successful about like attaining jhana on this retreat compared to my expectations in the past yeah so um you could do it sometimes and and also think about developing the capacity to to probe be very directed be intense without it being uh a kind of problematic grasping you know and that and view that as something that you could develop but but don't give up this because as you said it's it's been successful sometimes so in the end we want to find out what works best for you you know no matter what I say or anyone else it's really what works best for you but if you've got nothing to compare it to then you're not actually going to know is this is this is this the optimal thing for me this this method or actually is it you know second or even fifth best or you know so and there may well be like a lot of these things when we talk about opening we talk about hanging out there's there's fruits here that may be um to developing certain ways of working that may be worth more than the jhana yeah in terms of life in terms of desire in terms of capacity to be intense sometimes in life and sustain that without you know um so some of these things are much more significant than whether or not I get into the first jhana or whatever it is which you know um um so yeah there's different different levels here but but try try you know try a few things and it may well be that what you're describing actually is um you know is your method and it works fine no matter what anyone else says and yeah but you don't know yet because you haven't tried enough yeah okay cool and the other thing that I'm that I find myself doing uh you've you've said maximize the pleasure and I think because of all my insight practice I noticed that my attention goes so easily to pain maybe it's just being a human um what I noticed myself doing yesterday was um how can I how could this not hurt like this place of pain because when the jhana comes gross pain pretty much just goes away and and what I was finding yesterday was that focusing on a spot where there is pain the pain would go down just from the attention I guess there's a certain degree of letting go and the way the attention is that I'm not sure it doesn't really seem synonymous with focus on pleasure or maximize the pleasure and I'm just wondering your thoughts on that um well there's two things first of all I I didn't say maximize the pleasure I said maximize the enjoyment with it they're very different right pleasure is in in the object enjoyment is in my relationship with the object do you understand the difference does that clear it's really important that's helpful that's really important um then then just now you said focus on the pleasure and that was an instruction at some at some points you know because what we are trained in maybe just as human beings habitually may certainly as insight meditators is um is paying attention to the unpleasant and the difficult um most mostly that's what most people spend most of their insight meditation retreats doing is paying attention to what's difficult in what in one way or another and there's a real encouragement to that given for that and developing of willingness etc um so when you come to jhana practice you realize that sometimes what you can choose to do is focus on the pleasant in when there's unpleasant and pleasant you can focus on the pleasant you can choose to do that and in doing that you can learn all sorts of things not just about the tendency of the mind actually it's really hard because i keep the mind keeps wanting to go to the unpleasant um even say why don't you just stay there it just will go there so there's there's something to learn about the tendency and habit patterns of the mind but there's also again something to learn about dependent arising sometimes when i focus on the pleasant that pleasant amplifies and it takes over and the unpleasant disappears what's going on what do i need to understand about perception there so there's there's at least two things to understand if that's the case one is just a jhanic skill that if i if i want to develop in samadhi there are many occasions when it will be more helpful to focus on the pleasant and not the unpleasant there's a life skill in that but there's also samadhi meditative skill in there but then there's another level that has to do with dependent arising dependent arising of perception how is it that this pain that has been there for however long disappeared uh was unfabricated when i when i looked at the pleasant really really important then there's a third option or third category which is as you said sometimes i bring the attention to the unpleasant and the unpleasant disappears okay just bringing attention to it makes it disappear no a certain kind that's the thing there's a certain kind of attention because i can certainly bring this is this is the thing we talk about mindfulness as if mindfulness is just mindfulness and it's a pure thing you bring mindfulness to this you bring mindfulness to that we don't we bring mindfulness plus about a hundred other things maybe not 100 but we bring we bring mindfulness plus intention plus relationship plus subtle aversion or grasping or not plus equanimity plus meta plus self-view plus reality view plus all this is in a moment of pure so-called bare attention it's not bare at all there's no such thing do you understand this this is really really important so what you find is sometimes i bring attention to a pain and it makes it worse because there's more aversion wrapped up or there's a certain view or there's a certain time view how much longer or whatever it is or a certain reality view all kinds of things what's what's wrapped up in the mindfulness in that in that moment or while i'm looking at it is actually just fabricating more unpleasantness other times one looks and brings an attention and what's wrapped up in that attention or what's absent from that attention allows it to unfabricate allows the pain to unfabricate and other times you bring it it just stays the same whatever's in the mix of mindfulness is kind of just kind of holding it sort of at a level point the two two important things one is to realize this you know there's an old teaching i remember teachers saying if you pay attention to a pain three things could happen it could uh go away it could get worse or it could stay the same and the tea what's the what's the insight there in in that the insight was you can't do anything about it just put up with it in other words you're not in control of pain this isn't my teaching this i'm talking about something have you heard this before have you heard anyone say that it doesn't matter anyway um what we're saying here is can i realize two things that are extremely significant um a that there isn't such a thing as bear attention or pure mindfulness and how do i know that because i start xbox try and talk about this tomorrow because i start experimenting with noticing what else is in the mindfulness and then changing what else is in the mindfulness playing with what else in the mindfulness and that equates as playing with perception i okay what what is it to have a mindfulness that has much less aversion in it what does it go back to andy's thing what is it to have a mindfulness that has much less um this pain is not me or mine it has much less me or mine much less identification what is it to have a mindfulness that has much much less this is a real thing or much less uh time sense in it these are all factors um or yeah factors uh in the real sense of the world they they they do stuff from the latin to to factors um so it's they do stuff and we want to realize that and the only way we can really realize that is by actually getting skilled learning the art of playing with this is really really subtle and you start to realize when i bring this kind of attention let's say with no aversion the pain will decrease when i bring that kind of attention let's say with more aversion it will increase etc and and all these other things and they equate as playing with this equates is what i'm going to call insight ways of looking and i start to get really interested in how does the way of looking affect the perception in this case we're talking about pain but it could be anything and that's the whole road in in in my view that's the whole road of insight meditation and i start learning about playing with perception and its effects on the perception of anything the dependent arising of perception and that has to do with emptiness i'll go into this when i talk about it more meaning this pain does not exist as a thing unto itself it's dependent on how i look at it when i say how i look at it or way of looking i mean how i relate to it everything that's involved in my sensing of it this way of looking is just a shorthand for what's in my sensing of it my conception of self of it of reality of materiality of time of yeah and also my relationship with it a little bit push away a little bit i need to hang on to this because it's an important whatever all that's part of the way of looking and the art is to really start exploring all that and really playing with it and and eventually coming to the conclusion this thing and that thing and that thing and that thing and that thing and this thing and that thing everything everything no thing exists independently of way of looking it's not anything by its self and that's what emptiness means a thing everything is empty of independent existence in of an existence inherently independent of the way of being looked at in the moment does that make sense so um there's there's a there's a lot here it at the moment it sounds like what you're bringing is a skillful attention and it's disappearing now what i'm what i'm adding to that is fantastic and that little discovery there should pique your interest as it is and and there's a huge gorgeous avenue of um insight exploration that takes you to to the most profound insights if you if you want to follow it and explore all that but in the context of genre retreat should i not be no in the context of genre retreat so then you've still got these different options you've still got that um we could we could say which which what order do we choose them in so here's this pain first thing is um maybe don't don't focus on it just focus on on the pleasantness so that's my first choice in the context of genre retreat i'm still as i said learning about dependent rising there if the pain disappears yeah but if that doesn't work in this context if that doesn't work then i can bring the attention to the difficult and i can actually bring the attention so if one you're not but if actually you are you're doing the meta as your base practice right so for the most part yeah okay so then i can bring my attention to the difficult and i can work with it in two different ways one is and we mentioned this already what if i make that very difficult that that very difficulty that that unpleasantness that stuckness or whatever it is and make that the center of the meta so then in a way i'm i'm again if we talk in terms of attention i'm bringing a certain kind of attention to i'm looking at it in a certain way there's a certain way of looking which let's just imagine that that's where the metro is coming from also involves the imagination yeah that that would be like a second choice way of working but a third choice in this context in other contexts it would be the first choice way of working but in this context you bring the attention to it and uh and but you take care of what's wrapped up in that attention in terms of this primarily in terms of aversion and identification but there are lots of other possibilities and as we get deeper in this whole insight exploration you also get much wider in terms of how many possibilities there are are and also the power of different ways of looking so that for example does that make sense enough to the three the three yeah yeah so just to finish then the the you know go back to what andy said to view something as not me not mine this pain is not me or mine and the conventional view is yeah well it's happening in my shoulder or whatever it is um so automatically without thinking about it we we identify with it it's me or mine to bring in a view and actually practice this subtle view it's not a philosophy it's a subtle subtle subtly woven in to the attention or you could say what we're doing is subtly taking out the habitual subtle me mine you understand you're just taking it rather than adding something you're actually taking something out does that make sense you take you're taking it out rather than putting something in yes um so that's then you such as wow that's really powerful then there's a whole other as you develop this more and more there's a whole other um kind of more powerful ways of looking so to to get to the point where you you're sensing this pain and you're sensing it you and woven into the looking into the sensing is it's not real it's empty it doesn't exist independently that's an even more powerful so that does something even more or rather it works even more powerfully to defab unfabricate um again you could put that flip it around in the negative actually it looks like you're doing something extra and people say oh well i don't like doing in meditation i don't like doing i want to just be well we're doing plenty all the time with this unconscious habitual me mine me mine or it's real now i don't walk around thinking and obsessing actually i do but um most people don't walk around thinking and obsessing it's it's a real it's a real knee it's a real pain or whatever there's just automatically subconsciously non-verbally woven into the way of looking 99,999 times out of 100,000 um of views of me mine not verbal not conscious and also views of this is a real thing it's a real thing and so we're not really it first of course when you do these practices it feels like you're doing something oh now i have to remember me mine me mine what a lot of work i do this over and over um or not real not real empty etc and there's different variations of that but actually what you're doing is you're you're taking away in that moment in those moments a doing that has just become so habitual and is so unconscious that you don't even recognize it's doing you understand so you can view that as well as a as a kind of a less doing yeah yeah so when bahiya who knows the story of bahiya and the buddha monarchy surely you know the story of bahiya yeah um in the scene just the scene what does it mean what's the buddha getting at it's bare attention right in the scene just the scene you could read it that way you could read it in the scene just the scene let's see what else let's investigate what else we're adding to the scene s-e-e-n not s-e-e-e what else we're adding to the scene habitually unconsciously through avijja through ignorance that we don't even realize and in the scene just the scene let's start taking those things away see what happens and that's why the bahiya sutta ends with a description of uh the cessation of consciousness and perception of the unfabricated the transcend there's no there's no air earth fire water no sun no moon no no nothing there's no form no perception there if it meant just bare attention he's given bahiya this instruction of bare attention bahiya's gone and done his bare attention practice and then what should bahiya end up with he would end up with some kind of um vivid sense of this moment and it's pristine sort of uh reality that's what you get from bare attention practice but if you actually think about in the scene just the scene maybe hidden in there is a teaching about what else is there can we can we can we remove those factors and then see what you get and what will happen is all these factors are fabricators every time just say in different ways what I said before every time we're sensing something with an unconscious me mind or an unconscious sense of its reality it's fabricating that thing yeah start taking out those and there's lots of hidden ones even the belief in a present moment it's hidden in the conception of time there's a past there's a future there's a present it's so so every day woven in no one's walking around it's like it's a present moment it's not it's not at that level start taking these things away what's going to happen you're going to end up unfabricating unfabricating unfabricating end up in the place that's at the end of the bahiya suta which is know this know that disappearance of everything that's why bahiya became an arahant it's not because he anyway um do you understand so again how we can read something or hear something a hundred times i don't know how many how many times have you heard about the bahiya suta or read about it many many yeah it's very common um and we only just read and hear and and we're just thinking with the same old or reading and hearing listening with the same old fabrication same old view same old box and it filters out any any pulse actually maybe you know i'm not i don't mind but maybe there's a whole other level here and that actually makes sense of the two parts of the bahiya suta because otherwise they're very strange and it's an it's an udana suta udana means inspired utterance and the inspired utterance in that suta is not that in the scene just the scene which is what what you often hear in the teachings as if that's that's the thing that's the golden piece in the scene just the scene as an instruction for bare attention the inspired utterance is actually at the end when the buddha describes the describes the uh unfabricated the cessation if you take it the whole thing is meaning one thing it's a very terse instruction if you take it as meaning one thing it just it just totally disconnects the two parts of the suta they just don't make any sense together they don't belong together and the udana has gone the inspired utterance it's gone and it's significant that's why you hardly ever hear it mentioned in the context of the bahiya suta do you understand i'm gonna um uh but anyway the principle is is really there's a way of understanding there's a way of understanding uh what insight meditation or can be there's a way of framing what insight meditation is that that just keeps opening up deeper and deeper into this territory of emptiness and dependent arising um and i would like to talk i've obviously talked about it already a bit but um but you know that's really also understanding what attention is like and things like that and understanding these kinds of experiences that you're describing and that's so so important you know so so um potentially profoundly fruitful you know yeah okay good um andrew is it i don't know what time my interviews are and i am not sure does anyone know yeah so does do you have a sense it will be a quick one andrew or you're not sure it wouldn't be a quick one should we save it for another time and put you first on there well well why don't you take the mic um really enjoyed that robert i wonder if you do the same thing for the uh tata patana suta and anabhata suta as well in my fun suit is is there a way that you can i can't quite can you put the mic right in your yeah so i really enjoyed that robert i wonder if you could do the same thing with the mindfulness suta the suta patana or the anapani tatisuta whether whether within them you can also find clues to deeper insight i think so and maybe also um the jhana's in there somewhere i don't know the jhana's in the satipatana suta um i'll just say one thing about the satipatana suta um or one clue in the satipatana suta if that's okay for now and then maybe we'll pick up rest of it another time is that okay um who knows the refrain in the satipatana suta you mean there's like the chorus there's what does it say does anyone remember yeah so um so it says something like um you know it goes through each foundation description of what you pay attention to and then there's a refrain after each one and part of the refrain says um i can't remember the the words as it usually gets translated but something like um mindful of or attending to a ride do you remember attending to arising and ceasing or something like that attending to arising and ceasing or something with regard to vedana or with regard to mind states or whatever like that um and of course we read that and we think oh it's an instruction about anicca impermanence but the Pali word is actually samudaya and that word means um it's the same word that the buddha uses in relation to dependent arising and the teaching of dependent arising and how suffering arises so when he presents a four noble truths dukkha is something that samudayas it it arises together um and the actual and i can't remember what the Pali is but something like pay attention to origination factors and dissolution factors factors of arising and factors of ceasing so to me that it's possible one could interpret that that refrain as saying pay attention not just the fact that things arise and cease but how they arise and cease so coming back to um jason's question it's like okay here's here's a pain and it arises and ceases okay great that's a really good you know it's good to realize that the pain is impermanent and i can take that practice and i can develop it and notice more and more impermanence or i could start getting interested in in what we've been talking about the fact that when when there's this kind of attention a pain intensifies or arises more when there's that kind of attention it it fades it it gets fabricated more fabricated less and i start i'm interested in the origination and dissolution factors of vedna does that make sense and there's there's other suttas and they're kind of repeated like i can't remember where where where the buddha says um you know how do you how do you move from this level of awakening i think it's to the final level of awakening and and the buddha says a practitioner should train themselves to pay attention to the aggregates vedna and and perception and body and and all the rest of it mental formations consciousness and it and the usual english translation is something like um and c and pay attention um such is its disappearance such as it's arising such as its disappearance um but i think the the emphasis there is on the such in other word how how is it arising how is it disappearing otherwise it's just a teaching on on impermanence rather than teaching on this whole business of the the dependent arising of perception is this making sense yeah but you know this is this is what i tend to emphasize as being what i feel is the more interesting profound um liberating and sort of coherent view and whether it's what the buddha meant and you know it's like i'm not particularly interested in that but um it's it's the it's what i tend to teach now of course like i said noticing impermanence is important um just relatively speaking the liberative power and the kind of radicality sorry bar is the radicality of of what gets uncovered is um is of a whole different order because to say that everything's impermanent is it's okay you could say it's radical but but to say that nothing really exists at all as anything is a whole other level of to me radicality it's a whole other level of whoa we've just gone to a whole you know shift in our reality view yeah so these are the this is again people who uh will know that's what i tend to emphasize but the impermanence thing is really important too and and fruitful you know anyway um is that okay for now yeah okay i think um i think we're definitely going to need to end so why don't we have a bit of quiet together thank you so so okay thank you everybody and um time time for tea so please consider supporting dharmaseed with a year-end gift your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all visit dharmaseed.org donate to learn more and thanks

 So we talked about the Serjana, and that characterizes its primary nimitta as that sort of very exquisite, tender and lovely peacefulness. That's what's really characterizing it. And pointed out at several stages now, and pointed out again that, you know, that tender and lovely peacefulness and the exquisiteness of it is a very refined place. It's a very refined realm. It's a very refined state. It's a very refined texture. And again, if you're not sure, if it's definitely peaceful, maybe you've been there before, maybe it feels that this is peaceful, this is equanimous, it might feel very deep. The refinement is the thing that you, one of the things that tells you you've moved deeper. Now, refinement means more than just karma. So certainly when you move from PT, which can have a lot of waves in it, to something like that, there's a calming, that's for sure, and the peacefulness. But by refinement, again, I would use more the analogy of the different kinds of cloth. One cloth can be quite coarse, if I, my jeans here, the cloth is quite coarse there. A refined cloth has actually, in a way, it's got less fibers in it. It's got less material in it. There's less substance to it. So this is trying to kind of articulate or pinpoint what we mean by refined. So it's almost gossamer-like in its refinedness at this level. Things are getting really, really refined. To say it's more refined is more than to say just that it's karma. It is karma, but its texture is very, very refined in that sense, like a refined material. And so some of you, you know, I don't know, there can be states of very deep relaxation. Some of you may even have experiments a little bit with sleep yoga practices, dream and in between dream states. And there's states that are very peaceful. There's really not much happening. The mind is not moving anywhere. But compared to something like the third jhana, they don't have that refinement. They're thicker. They're more kind of velvety. So it can be helpful, etc. But when we talk about the peacefulness of the third jhana, we're really talking about a very refined quality. And so that's part of also what helps with the discernment. But today I'd like to go on and talk about the fourth jhana. And again, every time we move in the teachings or progress in the teachings, just a reminder about pacing. So we're going on in the teachings to the fourth jhana, but what's your pacing? That's the more important question. Where's your playground right now? The playground of your learning edge, the playground where you're spending most of your time marinated, marinating, exploring the elements of mastery. That's what will really help, rather than certainly not zipping through at the pace that I'm going through at, which will even get faster in the coming days because I've got some medical appointments, etc. So really the encouragement to discern and attune your whole being in your practice to your sense of your own with us in dialogue, your sense of your playground of your learning edge. And that's where you hang out, that's where you have your fun, that's where you work and play and marinate, etc. Okay, but the fourth jhana, let's go back to the Buddha and he says... So he's gone through jhanas 1, 2, 3 with their, both their kind of more technical descriptions and then each one with their simile, with the lotus pons, etc. We've been through that. And then he says, after the third jhana, then he says, and furthermore, with the... There's some translation things here, so let me just think how I'm going to... With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, as with the earlier disappearance of elation and distress, he enters, he's describing a monk here, he enters and remains in the fourth jhana, which is purity of equanimity and mindfulness, neither pleasure nor pain. He sits, the monk sits, permeating the body, again permeating, with a pure, bright awareness, so that there is nothing of his entire body, unpervaded by pure, bright awareness. So, and then his simile is just as if a person were sitting wrapped from head to foot with a white cloth, so that there would be no part of their body to which the white cloth did not extend. Even so, the practitioner sits, permeating their body with a pure, bright awareness. There is nothing of their entire body, unpervaded by pure, bright awareness. So that's his description of the fourth jhana. Technically, the jhana factors are just two now. Ekagata, which we've had in everyone, this with one thing prominent, so I'm translating it, has one thing is prominent, the mind is gathered around and in, and with one thing prominent. And that one thing prominent is the prime minimitre, which is technically it's upeka, and upeka we've been talking about last few days is equanimity. So technically, at least in the commentaries, etc., in the Buddha, etc., the two jhana factors here are ekagata and upeka. So one thing prominent and equanimity. We talked about equanimity a little bit already, we'll talk about a little bit more today, and then also perhaps even a little bit more as the retreat goes on. But if I had to find the sort of, what I think is the most helpful and accurate English word that encompasses the experience here and points us in the right direction, I would say stillness. I wouldn't actually, there is equanimity and that's important, etc., but I would say stillness. So that's the kind of almost overwhelming, what strikes on almost overwhelmingly is one is almost transfixed in and by an extremely refined translucent stillness. That's the texture and the experience. So we talked about refinement with the third jhana, it's even more refined. And again, that's a really important discerning factor of am I moving in the right direction here or do I need to shape this a little more or have I kind of gone off on a little bit of a sidetrack. It's really, really refined and it's kind of so refined like this cloth now is translucent, it's so subtle, so refined in its texture, the substance of the space that one's in, that it's as if it's translucent. Actually, it's also a very bright space, not for everyone, not always, but very common at this point to have a white light. And that white light is the stillness, the stillness is the white light. Technically, I would call it a secondary nimitta like we've talked about before, and this white light can come up earlier. But that white light, still, it's almost breathtaking white light of stillness. Usually it's a secondary nimitta, sometimes some people can have it's very pitch black, but I think more common is to have the bright white light there, kind of as the stillness mixed with the stillness. Technically, it's a secondary nimitta, but probably by this point organically, it's quite mixed so that it is the stillness, the light is the stillness, the stillness is the light. This light, again, I think we touched it before, I say it again, there's a brightness in the mind, and in a way that brightness is just a kind of sign signal manifestation reflection of the kind of brightness of presence at that point, the aliveness of the mind. That's one way of understanding what's actually happening there. It's a reflection of the sort of energy in the mind of being present, of being conscious. And there are some things, so when we read, I don't know how did it sound, to read the Buddha's description, does it sound maybe less appealing than the other ones? Yeah, a little less. More one? Yeah, I'll come back to the confusing bit, I will come back to that because I think it's actually a bit confusing, but I think a lot of people might hear it and say, I don't know, I like the lotus pawn business and all this upwelling of happiness. But there's something, so again, I want to translate it into experiential terms, there's something almost stunning here, breathtaking. It's really like one feels like when this still light, this very, very refined still light, it's almost as if one is again in another realm, breathing the air of another world. Quote an old poet. In fact, it has somewhere or other a few times in the Pali Canon, the Buddha gives it the synonym, the nickname, the beautiful. It's called the beautiful. And so, you know, hopefully this helps at least give a bit more sense than something kind of like, maybe it sounds a bit disappointing. And again, as on other occasions, like all the other jhanas, he refers to it as an escape, the saranam that we talked about the other day. The Buddha talks that way about the jhanas at times. And this is also a sense we can have in it. Once you're in this space, it really can feel at times like one is in another world. I'm in another world here, and that world is an escape from all the pleasure and pain and all the shakiness and all the complexity and difficulty of the world of the senses. So there is this one way, the tauta and one way of experiencing it is in a dualistic kind as an escape from this world in a dualistic kind of relationship or comparison. This is a better place, escape, escape. And we can have that sense. This other realm. And like with the third gentleman we talked about this, there's this possibility for the after effect of that experience to spill, after effect on perception, to spill out onto the world and color our sense of the world so that the essential nature of things, the essential nature of this world that we all agree on and feel that we inhabit is perceived to be essentially stillness. The same process as it was perceived to be essentially peaceful is now essentially stillness. And so there's the dualistic conception, a dualism with the world, duality with the world is an escape and it's a much better place to be. There's that kind of thrust, both teaching and experience. Then there's the thrust of here's an experience and it opens my eyes, opens my senses and my felt sense of what this world really is and what the nature of this world really is. So it's much less dualistic because then the world becomes, can be seen as being truly in essence this luminous transcendent stillness, much less dualistic. And as we talk with the third gentleman, there's a third possibility taking from the Buddha's teaching where he emphasized all the genres as perception attainments. On the way to pointing something out about the nature of perception, about the malleability of perception, about the dependent arising and thus the emptiness of all things. So you could see it seemingly dualistically, seemingly non-dualistically and in a way that transcends both because it understands the dependent arising of the perception of duality or non-duality, the dependent arising of this or that. So all this is really, really important when we come to not just understanding insight, but also understanding where are we going with the path? What are we aiming for? What is liberation and what does our path kind of suggest to us about our relationship with the world? And what kind of relationship and stance and view of the world does an awakened being have, a liberated being? Do they see it as something to escape from, never to be reborn again into this world? And there's a kind of dualistic conception or other possibilities. So it kind of might sound like a bit of a technical point at this stage, but it a lot ends up hinging on this about how we want to live, about how we treat the planet, about our sense of awakening, all of that. We will come back to that. And on the fourth, Jhana, the breath stops. One is no longer actually, as far as one can tell, breathing. So if you stay, if the breath is your primary object and you're actually staying with that all the way through, this will become very, very clear. The breath gets more and more subtle and subtler and subtler until eventually there is no breath. Or you might notice it, so to speak, out of the corner of your eye if you do another practice. So how is it that we don't die then? I don't know the answer to this. I mean, I assume we're just breathing very, very subtly and there's such a stillness in the being at that point that we don't need to move barely any oxygen. But maybe other people who know more about biology have better, I don't know. Well, yeah, that's my... One does continue to breathe, but it's not... Technically, the sutta say the breath stops. And most teachers would say the breath stops. And I think you would be hard pushed to, even if breath was your main object, to actually find a perception of the breath there. So any, you know, any... Technically, the perception of the breath stops. And my assumption is you're basically somehow still breathing. But at that point, because of the stillness and whatever is happening, the amount of actual oxygen that's moving and okay to sustain the organism for sometimes what can be, you know, quite long periods is very small. So I don't actually know what's going on. It's not that important, actually. It's neither here nor there. Just thought I'd mention it. The chitta, though, is what... The chitta is really captivated and transfixed by this translucent, very, very refined stillness, this sense of this beautiful, beautiful realm of stillness. And again, it's still a rupa giant. It's still, as the Buddha says, pervading the whole body. This luminous stillness is pervading the whole body. The body has become that. So the chitta is captivated and transfixed. And again, like the other jhanas we were talking about, once you've got quite a bit of experience with it in and out of that jhana, then you might begin to feel like, oh, now I actually have to kind of learn how to develop the steadiness of my focus to stay steady on this really, really refined frequency, this really, really refined luminous texture. So as always, sometimes at first it feels like effortless. And then afterwards you start to realize, oh, there's subtle work and play to be done here. And one of them is just maybe, maybe for some people, can I just learn to stay with this very, very refined stillness? Another thing that can happen experientially at this stage is the kind of the felt center of the chitta, the felt center of awareness can drop. And it might have dropped already in the second jhana and third jhana. So some people experience the center of the piti, often around their face or throat. And sometimes some people experience the center of the happiness around the heart chakra, around there. Sometimes when you get into the peacefulness, it's sort of lower in the belly. And sometimes with the stillness, it can feel like it's even lower than the bum, sort of it's down, sort of if I'm sitting on a chair, somewhere under here is the center of my awareness can feel like. This is a completely secondary phenomenon. So don't, you know, again, don't latch on to that. For some people, this is what they notice. Oh, there's this thing. And then they use that as a kind of indicator barometer of which jhana they're in. Not a very good idea because it's a secondary phenomenon. It's not reliable. We want to be really clear as always, what's the primary nimitta here? This is what's telling me what, where I am, if I'm, if I'm wanting to map it, this is what's discerning between jhana. So that's actually quite important. I'm mentioning it as a thing you might notice in your experience. If you don't notice it, no problem at all. It really doesn't matter at all. But if you do notice it, careful that you're not then latching on to that as the primary, your primary indicator. So I don't know what Jason was referring to, but I also find the Buddha's descriptions a bit confusing and puzzling. So he said something like, let's find it again. He said with the abandoning of, with the abandoning of, I said pleasure and pain, you could also say suka and dukkha. As with the earlier disappearance of elation and distress, that's this particular English translation, the Pali is somanasa domanasa. So with the abandoning of all that, but also with the earlier disappearance of something had been abandoned earlier, the monk enters and remains in the fourth jhana. So I wouldn't spend too long on this, but I will spend a little bit on that. The earlier disappearance of elation and distress, what could that be? And why is it coming up now anyway? Something's disappeared earlier. It could be, could be the earlier disappearance of PT and the hindrances. PT as elation and the hindrances as distress. And they just, excuse me, the hindrances disappeared in the first jhana, PT disappeared in the third jhana. So could be related to that. Or, and probably more accurately with these Pali words, somanasa and domanasa, they kind of, it's a bit complicated, but they, they may more refer to the, the distress when one kind of actually sees samsara, that sees the fact that one's living in a world of impermanent things and even pleasant things are impermanent, et cetera. And there's a kind of distress of the renunciate in that. The elation is when one realizes there's a path and has confidence that one can follow that path. I don't know. I've never heard a meditation teacher dwell much on this. And I'm certainly not going to. It's just when you go into the kind of scholarly thing, there's a bit of a debate. It's like, what's he talking about here? And why is he suddenly introducing these terms that he hasn't used before? I don't think it matters too much. The other phrase, abandoning of, abandoning of pleasure and pain with the abandoning of pleasure and pain. That's slightly odd as well, because you could say with the subsiding of pleasure and pain, but abandoning is something we do deliberately. And the Pali word is pahana, which is also what the Buddha uses when you abandon like a unskillful ethical behavior, you abandon this or that that's unwholesome, unskillful. So I don't actually think it matters, but what it could be pointing to is what we talked about yesterday when this question came up a couple of times about equanimity. So if I abandon means if I deliberately let go of clinging to pleasure or pain and clinging can be pushing away as well in my language, pushing away or pulling towards me or hanging on to pleasure and pain. In other words, if I abandon the push-pull, that's something that I can do deliberately. I deliberately do that. Actually, in this case, in the way I would understand it, I'm not even completely abandoning it, because if you remember what we said yesterday, actually, there's a whole spectrum here of really, really subtler and subtler levels of push-pull clinging. So if I kind of abandon them a lot, but not quite all the way, then what I'm going to end up with following on from what we said yesterday, when there's less pull, push-pull, then it attenuates the Vedana, the very pleasantness and unpleasantness eventually just attenuate and they become neither pleasant nor unpleasant. So the dominant Vedana becomes the sort of neutral one, because I've abandoned not so much the pleasure and pain, but I've abandoned any reactivity or I've abandoned a lot of the reactivity. So it actually gets, as you say, confusing. And why is he introducing this now, et cetera? Because it seems to suggest another way of going into the Jhana through playing with this push-pull and everything. So two things. One is about that, okay, so pleasure and pain decrease, pleasant and unpleasant decrease, and one's left with neither pleasant nor unpleasant. But what one can say about that neither pleasant nor unpleasant that one's left with is very, very, very nice. And if it's not, something's not right. It's not the fourth Jhana we're talking about. It's very nice and very enjoyable. It's really, again, it's an improvement over the third Jhana, and it's felt that way and it's experienced that way. And it's also somehow a kind of neutral Vedana. So that's one thing to bear in mind. The second is, and possibly more important is, so all this talk about abandoning pleasure and pain and earlier disappearance of elation and distress and what the different possibilities of that might mean. There's a whole scholarly debate here, and people think like one particular suttur has got mistakes in it, and they look for the Chinese parallel and it doesn't matter what. Basically, I would say it basically says there's equanimity. And that's all we need to worry about, I think. And that's probably what, yeah, I think that's all we need to worry about. Remember, we were defining equanimity yesterday when it came up in the Q&A as not an on-off switch, not a black or white, I have it there or it's not, I have it or I don't, but a spectrum. To the degree that there is equanimity, to that degree there is the reduction of the push and pull, there is the reduction of clinging. So equanimity is a spectrum, and another way of saying what that spectrum is, is it's a spectrum of decreasing push-pull, decreasing clinging. Make sense? Does that make sense? Yeah. So I think that's all we need to really understand here. It's pointing to a state of deep equanimity. And as I said, it came up yesterday, there's different ways and different contexts in which the Buddha talks about equanimity and it's a really interesting subject. This fourth Jhana is what the Buddha would call equanimity based on singleness. In contradiction or in complement to what on other occasions he talks about equanimity based on multiplicity. So he got equanimity based on singleness, equanimity based on multiplicity. What's this singleness multiplicity? Of phenomena. So you got equanimity based on many, in other words, equanimity in relationship to many phenomena happening, many things occurring in the senses. And this fourth Jhana is not that, because everything's pretty much disappeared. And there is just this translucent, refined, beautiful white stillness, bright white light stillness. It's just, so it's an equanimity based on, there's nothing else happening. It's just that body, all the rest of it is just that. So it's an equanimity based on singleness. You understand? Versus equanimity based on multiplicity, which we touched on yesterday. An example was when the Buddha talks about the eight worldly conditions, praise and blame, pleasure and pain, success and failure and gain and loss. And then Victor was asking about the word equanimity. We can say we can have, here's those conditions or those opposites, and we can have equanimity in relationship to those perceptions. There's the perception of praise and blame. This person's telling me, I'm wonderful. This person's telling me I'm an idiot, whatever it is. And the mind can have equanimity in relation to both. So what that means at that level, it's a more, it's a very important, but it's a kind of more superficial level of equanimity. What that means is, and we talked about, is equipoise, equi, equanimity means equine, I'm guessing, from anima, equal feeling towards both. I'm not like getting super excited and glad when this person praises me and then super depressed or angry when this person blames me. There's equipoise, equal feeling, whatever we want to say, towards opposites. So it's not like I like this and I don't like that. I prefer this. Or I get excited about this, elated about this and distressed about that. You understand? In relation to multiplicity of phenomena. Clear enough? Yeah. But again, as I pointed out yesterday in the Q&A, we can have deeper levels of equanimity. So for example, following on the example I used yesterday, I think the state of the vastness of awareness. I was like, yesterday, we've talked about that though. So when the consciousness opens up and because of the openness of the consciousness and because of the way one's practicing, what basically is like letting everything just belong to the space, that vast space of awareness. And after a time, it might seem like the bird that was just singing. It's just coming out of that silent awareness and then the sound just disappears back into it. And one has that and the body sensations and the thoughts and the rest of it. They're all just emanating from this kind of what starts to feel like a mystical divine, forever lasting space of peaceful, transcendent, peaceful awareness. And things just arise out of that source, mystical source perhaps, and disappear back into it. And seeing that and then my job as a meditator at that point is just let them come and let them go back, let them have it. It's not mine. Let the space contain and let all these phenomena belong to the awareness. And you can, I don't know if you can hear in that, what I've just described, there's a relationship, one's practicing a relationship of let it be, let it come, let it go, let it be. Can you hear that? So really beautiful way of practicing, extremely fruitful way of practicing, very, very, a lot of potential there. Not that difficult, just something that with setting up the practice right, when just staying with it. And again and again, one's practicing that relationship. Let it belong to the space. Let it come, let it go, let it belong to the space. And then the very mystical beauty of that space starts to help you let go. It's like the space itself is not doing anything, but the sense of it, it's almost like it can do the work. It can do the work of just being there, holding things, mystically being a source, and I don't know what you'd call that, a resting place of phenomena. And it's almost like the space does the work. Technically speaking, you're engaging a certain way of looking, you're engaging an insight way of looking, which is just letting be, letting go, letting go, letting go, which technically means less clinging, less push and pull. Do you understand? Less push and pull. And that just takes the whole thing deeper and deeper over time. And it might be that it starts to deepen so that the ugly sound and the beautiful sound start to feel like they lose their associated vedna. Exactly what I was saying before starts to happen. The pleasant unpleasant starts to fade into more just neutral phenomena. That neutrality may be impregnated with this mystical divinity, mystical silence, the mystical nature of awareness, but it's not in the particularity of an individual sound that it's pleasant or unpleasant. They've all got that, even the ugly sounds. Yes. And so it can deepen the equanimity there, can deepen and it can deepen again, I think we mentioned in the last few times, can deepen to the sense of one taste, which I mentioned in relation to the third Jhana. So everything in this, just follow this example of the vastness of awareness, everything can begin at some point to have all these phenomena, all the sounds, all the sensations, all the thoughts, all the whatever comes up feels like again, its true essence, its true substance is the same and that substance is in this case, mystical divine lasting forever awareness. So there's a kind of oneness of substance that emerges there and the opposites were at a more superficial level of equanimity. We were economists in relation to two things that were opposite praise, blame, pleasure, pain, etc. Because everything's one substance, the opposites kind of lose their meaning because they're the same thing. They're the same substance. They're no longer opposites anymore. It's all in this case divine awareness, the awareness of God, whatever you want to call it. Does it make sense? There are many, many other possibilities that function in the same, they unfold in the same way. A similar thing could happen with a kind of mystical love or a mystical compassion or all kinds of possibilities. Really, really lovely, very available. We just need to set up practice in the right way and follow it and follow it. And lovely as it is, it's still not the end of the road and nor is it the deep, the deepest end of equanimity because I think as I also mentioned yesterday, the sort of limit of equanimity that's possible. There are no objects that are anymore even arising because the fading has not just faded the pleasure and the pain, the pleasant and unpleasant vedana. It's actually faded any sense of any object or any phenomenon or any sensation as well. So there are then in that ultra-deep equanimity, no objects, things, sensations, phenomena in relation to which a person can be equanimous. So there's a strange paradox in the depth of equanimity that the truest equanimity can't really be regarded as an equanimity because there's nothing there to be equanimous about. Anyway, here we have in the fourth jhana an instance of equanimity based on singleness in complement to, in addition to other instances where the Buddha talks about equanimity based on multiplicity. So I think it's mostly true to say, let's say predominantly true to say at this point, in the fourth jhana there's a kind of, if you check there what's the emotion, I think the most likely answer, the most accurate answer, the most prevalent would be there isn't an emotion. The emotions have been pacified in that state. There's an absence or a pacification of emotion. Let's say a bit that come back, come back to that, maybe qualify that statement. So this is interesting, you know, and again this subject of emotion as human beings, and I said it's one of those subjects that I don't think there's any end for us. This shouldn't be an end for us as human beings of our exploration of emotion, even just in our conception of emotion, let alone what we do with emotions and how we relate to them. But here, you know, what happens, what can be very common actually for human beings, and we don't get a lot of help in our culture with this, is that it's quite common for people to be actually afraid of their emotions. I don't, if a strong emotion comes up, I'm really not confident that I can tolerate it or be with it, that I won't end up being a puddle on the floor, or a nervous wreck, or out of control, or whatever it is. And so people relate around that fear in different ways, and it's only because in our culture we rarely get the training to really work well with the heart. And, you know, can we, to me Dharma practice should be over time broadening and deepening the capacity of the heart. We can hold a lot of emotion, we can hold intense emotion, and the grief at what's happening in our world, this is hard to bear, hard to hold. And it may be that for many people that's one of the reasons why, for instance, I don't know if it's true, but maybe species loss and climate change and species, I used to call it species extinction, I think a better word I read, actually species extermination, mass species extermination, that it's just too much grief to bear, and so people avoid it. And so if you look at what's most viewed every day in the newspaper, the climate change article rarely makes the top ten, etc. I'm not going to go into that now, but the, or a personal grief, and find just some ways, or whatever it is, or joy. Sometimes, you know, and we talked about that bandwidth of happiness, that for some people it's like, well, okay, that's enough now, can I move on to the karma one? And can we hold that much joy? Can we hold that much energy of PT? Can we allow it to flow through us? Can we hold that much grief? Can we hold that much, is there such a thing as skillful anger or frustration in ways that can be skillful that are really big? All this. So to me, a huge part of the Dharma path is actually broadening and deepening the capacity, the holding capacity of the heart. I think that's really, we get very little training for this in our culture. But in addition, it's also, there's the possibility of developing through Dharma practice, you know, what we've emphasized from day one today, this sensitivity and refinement, so that not just our range of intensity, but also our range of kinds of emotions we're even aware of, or that we notice or can tune into, grows. And the beauty of having that extended palette in our inner life, and then from which to relate to others and our beloveds and the rest of the world and ourselves and art and the rest of it. To me, that's also really, really important. But there is, as I said, sometimes for a lot of human beings in our culture, there is a kind of, to some degree or other, there's a fear of one's emotional life. I'm okay with this kind of range, but if it gets kind of too much over there or too much over there, I'm really not sure that I'm okay. I'm really not sure I will be okay. But there can also correspondingly be for people, some people, a fear of the absence of emotion, maybe even the same person at a different time. And sometimes, you know, there's an absence of emotion in the fourth genre, you could say, and someone's like, I'm not sure I like the sound of that. Or one has an idea that can't be healthy. And sometimes that idea about that state, and it's just a temporary state, the idea about it is maybe coming just from ideas that one is sort of woven into one's view at the moment because of what one's working on. So I remember, you know, I started meditating, and I think I very briefly told you, kind of went a little nuts for a couple of years. And part of my rehabilitation was getting into psychotherapy, etc., and getting really interested but really helped with my emotional life, which was either kind of way too extreme without my understanding it or just kind of cut off from certain emotions. I got a lot of exploration and opening with the emotions and working with that. But then I feel like in the view, I could have very easily gone into the opposite view, which is, if the emotion's quiet, then that must be a suppression. Well, that must have unhealthy long-term consequences if you do that kind of thing. Authentic being needs to have emotion, and it's probably difficult emotion because those are the more authentic ones. So these are the kind of views, and they're actually not uncommon. So there can be for some people a fear of emotion. There can be for other people or the same person at a different time a fear of the quietening, a fear of the absence of emotions. You know, interesting thing to check out. Having said there's an absence of emotion here, it's actually, again, like all these things, it's not quite true. It's not so black and white because of a few things. One is, I would say, the fourth jhana still, it still has happiness in it. It somehow still has happiness, but it's so almost like invisibly woven into the texture or impalpably almost woven into the texture. It's so subtle. It's implicit in it. So it takes quite a while to even notice it, that actually this is, and it makes sense because it was born out of happiness. If you go through the jhana, this state was born out of happiness. It was born out of the happiness of the second jhana and the refined happiness of the third jhana. But it's not at all something you notice at first, really. But I would say it's definitely there, and certainly in the beginning sort of levels of the fourth jhana, it still has, and it still should have, what we might call the echoes or the embers of the third jhana's sukha and peacefulness. And that kind of really warm, gorgeous peacefulness, it's still kind of got the embers there. So the beginning of the fourth jhana has the kind of echoes of that left over in the third jhana. And there, again, subtle, subtle emotional hues, colors pervading this space, if you like. It also, I would say, again, contradicting what I said earlier about the absence of emotion, it also, like all the jhanas, has metta in it, but again, it's hidden. The metta is hidden at this point. And I've always found it interesting when the Buddha talks about right intention, which is the second factor of the Noble Eightfold Path, right intention or right thought, or what other translations of that are there? Right resolve, yeah, no, right view is the first one. Yeah, so right resolve, right thought, right intention, yeah. Okay, good. So what are those, what does the Buddha say, what they are? Does anyone know? It's okay if you don't. Okay, I'll tell you. He says, said, the intention towards renunciation, the intention to or resolve towards non-ill will, and the intention, the result was non-cruelty. Now, technically, if you look at all the lists and all this business and the ill will is the far enemy of metta, and cruelty is the far enemy of compassion, it's the opposite. So you think, well, why didn't he just say, instead of saying non-ill will and non-cruelty, why didn't he just say metta and compassion? And sometimes you'll hear it translated that way. Partly, I think he's saying that to allow the legitimacy and the space for this, exactly this kind of state, the fourth jhana, something like that, and it's deep equanimity, there's metta pregnant in it, but it's a state of non-ill will, it's definitely a state of non-ill will, it's definitely a state of non-cruelty. So it's a subtle just distinction in language that he's making that allows room for, in other words, for these things, metta and compassion, not to be foremost all the time, which allows, as I said, space and room to explore states where everything goes quiet apparently. Yet I would say there's metta wrapped in it. There's another kind of secondary emotion, but I think I'll come back to that when we talk about the formless realms, the formless jhanas, because it also has that one. But anyway, so in some senses, it really feels like a pacification or absence of emotion. In other ways, actually, it's not quite accurate. Again, nothing's really as black and white as it appears. It's not quite accurate to say that. I remember, several of you have shared, you know, sometimes there's certain images that arise, very briefly or very much in the background that kind of either ignite a certain jhana or help you access the primary nimitta or even appear in a jhana, not as part of a discursive thought, but just as part of something that's kind of very subtly from the background supporting the whole thing, propping up the whole thing. So the Buddha's image of being wrapped in a white cloth, I find actually that, for me, that was one of those. Or wrapped in a, it could even be a cloth of pure luminous stillness. Or, yeah, just wrapped in that pure luminous stillness. But there may be these images very, very much in the background, but still doing their work in this very kind of tinctural way that we talked about. It's a very, very subtle way. If I go too much into the image, then it becomes more like an imaginal thing. But they can be very, very much in the background. The primary nimitta is still where the attention is, but they're kind of somehow helping to consolidate and get deeper into the whole thing and the whole thing to get richer, the primary nimitta to get richer, not richer because there's more images. One I used to have was lying, it's almost like, maybe because I like the image so much of this pond with the lotuses. And so I used to get an image of kind of lying at the bottom of that pond. And the sun coming, so imagine this clear, clear water, I don't know, 10, 20 feet deep. And I'm lying on the bottom of the pond and looking upwards at all this light. But there's a complete sort of rest in it. The mind is so not asleep. It's so alive and it's so rested at the same time in this luminosity. So somehow it wasn't something that just came, it's just like that lying and looking up and kind of totally open in that way to this light. And I could breathe underwater. Another one which completely doesn't make rational sense was sort of, I would kind of feel sometimes, or afterwards, I would say to myself, I just feel completely hung out to dry. Which doesn't, what the hell does that mean? But the sort of image I would have afterwards was like, as if I was hanging on a clothesline, like with pegs on my arms and just hanging there, which doesn't even sound very comfortable. But what was that about? It was actually that there was the sort of complete satisfaction that started in the third genre. It was like that was just ramped up beyond all sort of limits. There was like, you couldn't have got any more completely rung out, rung through and put through the washing machine of this just process and then just, I'm done. But anyway, these are very much second, very, very much secondary nimatas. So they're just little things that can somehow help at times or give indications. Yeah, somewhere or other, I think it's in some commentary that talks about two levels of the fourth genre. And I don't know what the two levels they're referring to are, but I could delineate two levels certain in two different ways or maybe three levels. Again, it doesn't really matter. But what matters is, am I getting to know the territory? Am I getting familiar with the different ranges and sort of sub states and textures of this whole space? So in a way that, yes, this thing about being hung out to dry that peacefulness and kind of complete contentment that was there in the beginning of the third genre and the deepening echoes of the warmth and tender peacefulness of the third genre, they characterized, you could say, the beginning stages of the fourth genre. So that may be one level we could talk about. But as it deepens, even those things begin to fade and they almost become indiscernible. And there's just left this kind of purity, this pure stillness, pure non-movement, pure absence of solidity, free of solidity, pure presence, pure awareness, pure consciousness. There's a sense of purity there that's very beautiful. And that comes to predominate. Could also divide it another way into, again, like we divided the third genre, that there's the stillness is here in the energy body size. But one might also, as it deepens, get a sense of a much larger realm of stillness. But again, as we said with the third genre, the primary focus wants to be in the energy body size. I'm not yet going out there. That comes later. I'm not yet exploring the far reaches of this realm of stillness. I want to be primarily here for the fourth genre to really consolidate and deepen and really bathe in its milk. So, yeah, you could make three or two or this two or that two. It doesn't really matter. For me, it doesn't matter. I think the invitation, though, is again to discern more, to get to really know spaces inside out and get really familiar with them. So how does it progress to the fourth genre? How do we do that? Well, mostly through the maturing of the third genre. That's over time, long term maturing of the third genre will just deliver the fourth genre at some point. Eventually, how do we get to the fourth genre? Well, the same way with all that mastery business. Eventually, it's just by subtle intention through the familiarity of going to this space, this level, fourth genre, eventually. We just remember that stillness, remember that state, remember that beauty and purity. And it can come back just from the intention. What can help if it's ready to mature, if it's maturing and just needs a little help, and sometimes you don't even need to do that little bit of nudging, but what can help is noticing within the third genre, noticing and tuning to, well, let's say two things, the stillness and equanimity in the third genre. Third genre has peacefulness, but as I said, it also has a lot of stillness in it. It's not completely still, but if I tune to the element or the feeling or the sense of still, the frequency of stillness in it, again, that's going to stand out and it may help the whole thing deepen, because what I tune to gets amplified, and in this case, the amplification is a deepening. So the stillness, tuning to the stillness, noticing and then tuning to, tuning to the stillness or equanimity in the third genre, or noticing and tuning to whatever the most refined frequency is in the third genre. Because again, as we move from genre to genre, there should be an increase in refinement. So tuning to what's most refined is a general principle now, not just applies to this. It will help me, help me take me to the next level, and the stillness of the fourth genre will begin to emerge. I would say, again, that a bit like what we said with the third genre, the fourth genre will be better, it will feel better, more compelling, more clear, more clearly discriminated, more fulfilling and all that. When it actually has within it, and you can feel within it, some of that profound and beautiful tender gentleness that goes with the third genre. So in other words, the beginnings of the fourth genre, when they have that kind of experience, that usually ends up being a much richer fourth genre experience, even if later on they kind of refine out. They can get subtler and subtler and then they get kind of purified out. And so there's this luminous stillness, and you can play with same things really, opening, opening the body and opening the mind to it, opening, abandoning, surrendering or penetrating, same modes of attention. Or you can think about dissolving, which I think I mentioned before, but somehow at this level it gets really, really potent, for me, this word, dissolving. What would it be to dissolve my body into this luminous beautiful stillness? Dissolve my body into it. The body becomes that, but the body also just dissolves in it. So there's a movement of intention there, there's a direction there. And again, just as in the third genre, we said sometimes there can be a kind of felt sense of bifurcating or splitting between the mind and the body a little bit, subtly. Again, at first, body and mind totally integrated, they're just really into it. And then with a lot of fourth genre experience, sometimes you can feel like, oh, body and mind, and then dissolving my body, and at other times dissolve my mind. What is it to dissolve the mind into this luminous stillness and to play with that kind of intention? So at times those feel like separate intentions, separate processes. Ideally, they're one, but it doesn't matter. This is again, we're getting out of this thinking of a Jhana is a very neat, defined black and white on off switch or a box, and it's more just territory here. And okay, now I dissolve my body and then I dissolve my mind. It doesn't matter if they're separate. So Jhana practice is a broader thing, rather than worrying about those edges of, is this it, is it not it, is it right, is it wrong? But like always, we want to really penetrate and really get intimate, really get inside and intimate with this luminous stillness. And remembering the primary, the primary nimitta is this purity of refined stillness. When one, the funny thing can happen, you might have witnessed, you experienced this or witnessed other people. Sometimes in the fourth Jhana what can be quite common is a kind of leaning forward, the physical body actually starts leaning forward. And this can be, I don't know how common this is, actually leaning forward, and it can be really, really extreme so that someone sitting cross-legged on the floor actually ends up with their forehead on the floor. And someone might think, oh, they're fast asleep, or they see them kind of going like this and they think they're fast, they're far from it. So the nodding looks very different and feels very different. You can tell the difference between these things that they're quite, they both involve, they're really quite different phenomena. So Ajahn Mahabhuwa was one of the great, he died not that long ago, in fact one of the great 20th century Thai forest meditation masters. And he used to say in relation to this leaning forward, don't alter it at all, don't mess with it. The process is happening, you let it happen. And if your forehead ends up on the floor, you let it end up on the floor. I had a teacher who said, as soon as you start noticing that happening, stop it and just make sure you can sit upright. So there's differences of opinions. I have, I admit, overly has gotten into what I, I haven't got a bad habit, a habit that I slightly regret. So I do lean forward and sometimes quite a lot. It would, looking back, it would have been better had I nipped that habit in the bud and not allowed it to develop because it can be a little distracting as things go on. But it's certainly not a tragedy. However, I'm saying this now so that if you encounter it, you can perhaps nip it in the bud and make an intention to sit upright, stop it when it's happening. But even if it does happen, you can, sometimes you can just very gently sit up, keep the meditation going. What's happening here? So I don't know. I'm not sure percentage-wise how common this is, but it's really not uncommon. Is it that we're conceiving of our attention as something that operates forwards? And so the stillness is in front of us and we generally conceive of our attention. I know I can hear something back there, but because the eyes go that way and the nose is there and the mouth is there, the sense organs there, they're in the head and they're kind of pointing that way. Is it that we just habitually conceive of our attention going forwards and then we conceive of the stillness primarily in front of us and that's why we're leaning forwards. So do you remember, you can play with a few things here, and it is, I think, I think it's worth trying to nip this in the bud if it starts to come up for you, but you can play with a few things. Almost like imagining, imagine the stillness 360 degrees, like the Buddha's analogy, wrapped, wrapped around the body. So it's 360 degrees around, it's a scaffolding of stillness almost. It's right around the body space that's keeping it upright because there's as much support or there's as much presence of the scaffolding in front as behind, as to the sides. And so playing with that 360 degrees prevents us from kind of a habit of feeling and sensing objects in the mind being somewhat in front of us. And then in a way my attention is pulled equally, equinamously, in all the different directions there may be less chance of falling over forwards. Remember when we, on the opening evening, when I introduced the counting with the breath, and actually said play with it behind, getting used to playing with or breathing in from the back, getting used to turning around in physical space 180 degrees, the sense of where we're paying attention and which direction the attention moves in, can bear significant fruits later on when it comes to something like this. So it could be something like that. It could also be at this point, I don't know, I've never really talked to anyone about this, it could also be that what starts to happen at this level is a significant degree of unfabricating is happening. So we've talked a little bit about that, some of you are very familiar with this teaching, but it's related to what I said about equanimity. As we let go of more and more clinging in the moment, there's less and less push and pull, less and less clinging, then we talked about the vague, the pleasant and unpleasant are actually fabricated less, less and less and less and less. So there's a more and more unfabricating, less and less fabricating of what? Well, of self, but also in this case of perception and sensation. Less and less and less, until at certain points the sensations don't even arise. Less and less and less, there's more unfabricating. There's quite a degree of unfabricating at this point, at the point of the fourth jhana. Unfabricating is quite a degree of deconstructing or non-constructing going on. So sometimes I wonder, is this sort of falling over just a kind of reflection in the body of the kind of unfabricating that's going on? There's less construction, because it also happens, well, actually it also happens for me sometimes, and again, it's a habit that if I could go back I would change, but it can also can occur when you're deep in insight ways of looking, and they're working primarily with this unfabricating, working with deeply letting go, and a similar sort of thing happens. I don't know, I'm not sure, but it's worth, yeah, it's worth knowing about and working with, it's part of the territory potentially here, and it may be something that comes to bother you if you don't nip it in the bud, but maybe, I don't think it's that much of an issue for me, but for some people I feel like, oh, I really wish, etc. Probably more significant thing to look out for even is that, again, after many experiences going in and out of the fourth jhana and getting used to it, you remember what I said about a dam bursting when you reach a new level, and it's just like, wow, it's just happening, I don't have to do anything, it's just perfect as it is, and then after a while it's like, ah, now some more subtle work on play, I see the need for that and the potential for that. So one thing that can happen, a kind of problem that emerges after quite a lot of experience going in and out of fourth jhana, is that sometimes one's there, and it's very nice, it's very still, the mind is definitely very mindful, very equanimous, very focused, but it's just a fraction dull. So there's no nodding, there's no, none of that, we're talking, the whole thing's much, much more subtle, it's very subtly, very slightly dull at times. This actually is an important thing to notice, to look out for and notice, it's still a state of equanimity, of mindfulness, of clear awareness, and all the rest of it, of focus, of samadhi, blah blah blah, just relatively to what it could be, it's just a little bit dull. And that's a really important thing to take note of, to note, ah, it's just gone into that slight dullness. And can I ramp up in this moment the sense of presence? So just turn up the sense of, I'm present to this primary nimata, to this stillness, there's a presence there, a real aliveness of presence. One of the ways you can do this is really come into the sense of now, now, now, it's now, this thing is now, this stillness is now, and really come sharply into the sense of now with presence, there's two ways of saying the same thing, and that allows it to become brighter and more alive, etc. Okay, there's many instances, like I said, the Buddha talks about the jhanas a lot in the Pali Canon, and there's some instances where he sort of does it in a certain form, and another instance where he does it in another form, and another instance where in a third kind of form in a way of explaining. And there's one of these sort of stock, almost contrived formulas, is he goes through the first four jhanas, and he describes them as we've just described them, and then he says, then the practitioner, then the monk, he's usually talking about monks, he says, so euam samahite chite, which means something like he, the monk, with a chitta, with a mind heart, with an awareness, samahite, thus meaning from the jhanas, usual translation you'll hear is concentrated, but actually it means samadified. Okay, Pali why I'm wanting to dwell, and he goes through a whole list, so what he's going to do is go through a whole list describing what the practitioner has got from their practice of the jhanas, of the first four jhanas, and then describing what they then do with that, how they put that mind to work, and there's different formulas and different contexts depending on who he's talking to and what he's describing. But what's often translated, for example, so first four jhanas, and then the practitioner, with a mind thus concentrated. So I'm just wanting to point out, we've dwelt on this a number of times, what's the difference if we translate samadhi as concentration or we leave it as samadhi? We talked about this, right? So to me, samadhi is the richer word, and I don't get narrow into that view of what... because it's very easy to read these texts and take certain conclusions, and I want to actually bother to take the time going through this and here, and kind of indicate how we can read these passages and the translations of these passages, and just assume it means with a mind very concentrated and very stuck, very able to stay steady with one thing, and very like a laser beam. So all these words, it's very easy to hear that way. I'm going to bother to go through the parlour, and actually see, well, there's different ways we can open this out. So that's the first one. With a citta, with a mind thus samadified, thus harmonised in agreement, yeah? To me, it's got a whole different range and richness of what's involved there, rather than just concentrated. Then he said, so with a mind thus samadified, and then he goes on other adjectives, with a mind thus not just samadified, but parisudhe, which means purified. What might that mean? Purified. Purified of what? Okay, but that should have come with the first Jhana. Yeah, so of Vedana, hindrances... It could mean all kinds of things. I think what I'm pointing to is how, partly what I want to point to is how easy it is to read these texts and read them, like when we listen to Dharma talks, and listen already programmed, or read already programmed, to hear a certain narrow range of meaning, which is not necessarily there. It could be also purified of relative grossness, yeah? When you refine something, so it... I just want to open up, yeah? So yes, hindrances, subtle hindrances, yes, pleasure and pain, yes, relative grossness. So in other words, what is happening, because this is the point, okay, the Buddha's gone through the first four Jhanas, and then he's like explaining to someone other what the point of it is. So again, we go back to this whole question, we've started the retreat so much talking about what's the point of this? Why are we doing this? We need to emphasize what's important here, right? Coming back to that. So it could be purified of, who knows, but could be purified of grossness, of subtle hindrances, of pleasure and pain. Then he repeats this, parisudhe pariodate, which actually also means pure. It also means, this word pariodate also means very clever, or excellent, or accomplished. So, and sometimes it's translated as bright, and in English that word has that bright, oh, she's very bright, so it has a kind of ambiguous range of meaning. And as I said, there is this sense of visual luminosity there, but that's really a kind of brightness of presence. And when we talk about a bright person, it's also that they're bright in presence, it's not just that they're kind of very good at doing Rubik's Cube or whatever. The mind is bright with presence, but also bright with possibility, like when we talk about so-and-so is bright, it's like there's possibility there. So this translation of bright is a very pure realm of still light. The purity though is interesting if we linger on this way, because it's also related to the stillness. Now there's a stillness itself is something pure. Purity of push-pull, purity of equanimity. So again, just expanding on the possible meanings, when you say a person has a really pure character, it's like saying they have a lot of integrity, which is also like saying they can't be bribed by something pleasant or blackmailed by the threat of something unpleasant. Do you understand? So there's a kind of, the purity could refer to something like that. It's about how is the mind in its poise right now in relation to the threat and the dangling carrot of unpleasant and pleasant. Do you understand? So opening up meanings, it's so easy to hear and read and just hear and read what we already know, what we've already been told. So that's the most common way, unfortunately, for human beings to hear and read, is just to hear and read what we already know. And as I said, it could also be pure to your refinement. So if you think about something like gold, you mine gold or you, whenever they do, gather it, mine it, and it's got other stuff in it. And so to purify gold is also to refine gold. So all these things, it's like the mind is getting down to something of its pure, nearer, let's say, to its pure natural nature. So words like pure, you know, they can mean a lot of different things. And in a way, I think it's pregnant with all those meanings, and it should be rather than bring it down. Because then he says, and now he's still a lot of adjectives describing this mind after the meditation, after the fourth jhana. Anangana, which is something like passionless or blameless or unblemished. And vigatupakilesa, which means something like free, without defilements or obstructions. Mudubhute, which means malleable, malleable, pliant, supple. Later there's passages where he does the same description, and he really picks up on that one, and he says, like a goldsmith, when they've got this substance, now they've got their gold, molten gold, then they can shape it however they like. Malleable, malleable, malleable. And that may be one of, is in my view, one of the really centrally important fruits of all this. Stressed it at the beginning of the treat, right? Malleability, that one of the fruits of jhana, well the main fruits of jhana practice is the malleability of perception. So it's here now. Kamaniye, which means workable, able to be put or to work or directed in work in a certain way. Titae, which means steady. And then the last one, aninjapati, which means attained to imperturbability. Very easy, I think, to hear that or read that in that context and just read it very quickly and think, yeah, it means the mind is now absolutely nailed to its object. It doesn't move. It's imperturbable. Does it only point to that? Might it also point again to equanimity, which we've been talking about, and the quietening of the push and pull. Push and pull throws the mind out of balance, right? Exerting a thought, you're pulled by something or trying to hang on to something or pushing something away. It throws the mind out of balance. And so it could be that the imperturbability really refers, or refers as well, or maybe even refers principally, less to a kind of complete ability to fix the mind's attention on something unwaveringly and more to this capacity not to be swayed. It's steady. It's unshakable. It's imperturbable. I'm not swayed by my reactivity to any phenomenon, unpleasant, unpleasant, or otherwise, maybe. But really the point here is, again, just to point, it's an illustration in a much larger context of how very easily we can hear and read and just basically hear and read what we already know, and we're learning very little new. Things are not being opened up or challenged. And in this particular case, to open up the view, and it's related to what are we doing here, what's why are we doing this, and therefore what's important. Of all the different things that are going on when we practice samadhi, and all the different things that we could emphasize, and again, how much what we emphasize, how much the big picture view will end up directing us consciously or unconsciously, wisely or unwisely, in terms of our micro moment-to-moment choices, right? I said that like five times already, so I'm just repeating. And then he says chittam abhinyrati, I think, and abhinyna, I can't read my writing, abhinynameti, which basically directs or applies the chitta, inclines or bends the chitta towards, and then he gives a whole bunch of things that you can then do with the mind, or direct your awareness to. And one of them is vipassana practice, or certain kinds of vipassana practice. I want to point something else out about that sutta. So here he is, he's speaking, he's explaining to someone, this person or that person, it's a kind of contrived educational situation, a contrived formula in a way. He goes through the first four jhanas, he gives the stock descriptions, and then he gives this whole list of, and thus the monk with the mind, thus, dah dah dah dah dah, and thus, dah dah dah dah, and thus, dah dah dah dah, does this and this and this and this. The whole thing is a very stock contrived formula. But to me, it's like, not to get too, and I'll come back to this as we go on, not to get misled by that contrived formula. It's actually see the sutta in context, that it is a contrived formula. It's a kind of educational, heuristic technique he's doing. It doesn't then mean that we should then do jhana one, followed by jhana two, followed by jhana three, followed by jhana four, and then we decide, okay, now I'm going to do this. Okay, it's very, again, it's very easy to read, and to read a sutta like that, and just take it kind of not really understanding it as a heuristic tool, as an educational tool. It's a contrived formula. It doesn't mean that that's how we meditate, but there are some people who would teach that way, because it says, well, one, two, three, four, and then you do this, then you do your vipassana, or whatever, and then maybe other situations, where it's one, two, three, up to eight, and then you do your vipassana, but these are just, do you understand what I mean by contrived? It's not really a strict instruction for practice. Okay. A couple of things. If any of you, or any of your future selves, or anyone listening to this anywhere, any time, if ever you decide that you would like to really, however you find that you would really like to get deep into jhana practice, and you find yourself in that territory, you want to devote some time to it, jhanas and how they work with insight so beautifully and fertile. Once you got to this stage, it can be really, really helpful, I think, to almost make the, I know monk teachers, make the fourth jhana your base. So Janli, Jan Dhamdara is one of my teachers' teachers' teacher. He's a famous monk from the mid-20th century in Thailand, Thai forest monk. He said, make the fourth jhana your base. It's like it's a hub, and from there you can go to lots of places. And it's this place of very bright, very steady, but kind of not very warm awareness and consciousness. I would like to say, make the third and fourth jhana your base. If you ever get to that level of practice and you decide you're really into this, make the third and fourth. Because the third has such a lovely, warm, healing kind of space, it's such a lovely, warm, healing space. So you make the third and fourth your base and kind of then venture out backwards in the jhanas, forwards in the jhanas to different insight practices, and that becomes kind of home base. But having said that, you know, as I said, this is just, some of you will never want to do that, and you should never feel that you should do that. You don't have to develop jhanas to that degree. You don't have to develop jhanas to any degree. Sometimes people say, I need the jhanas, I need the jhanas, or just because I've emphasized something or they've heard something, I need the jhanas to get insight. I don't think it's true. There is a passage where the Buddha says, without jhana there's no liberation, without jhana there's no insight, without insight there's no liberation. But I'm not sure. Or you might have heard me kind of say something. Sometimes what I say is just in a context, and certainly, where are we now? It's like more than ten years ago, when I first started talking in here, in public, talks about jhanas, you know, the context was much more anti-jhana and much more dismissive and poo-pooing and thinking they were a ridiculous waste of time and they were very bad and they were very bad and dangerous. So teaching is in a context, so I might really pump up and say just how important they are. But you don't need the jhanas. And sometimes people think, oh I emphasize their healing qualities, I need the jhanas to heal. You probably don't. They can be very healing, but it's very rare I think that someone actually needs the jhanas to heal in some other way, whatever it is that they're wanting to heal. However, having said that, the way I would say, the way we're emphasizing, the ways we're emphasizing working on this retreat, what you may need to heal, much more than the jhana itself, is some of what we've been emphasizing in the way of working. So for instance, when we talk about opening, and really opening, and really abandoning, and really surrendering, that may be much more significant in a person's healing than the attainment of this or that jhana. Because that person may not be, may have for lots of different reasons, actually quite a limited ability to really open, or they think they're really opening, actually it's only half way, or whatever, or to be really whole hearted. These things, I would say, and whether it comes, however it comes, they may be necessary. I think it's probably rare that an actual jhana, it may be possible, an actual jhana is necessary, and there's nothing else that would give that kind of healing for a certain person. But to be able to open as a human being, I mean really open, open the energy body, and open, open, like this, that may well be quite significant, because it has to do with much more than the attainment of a state in meditation, it has to do with one's relationship with life and existence, and relationship with others, and all kinds of things, sexuality, all kinds of things. Do you remember we talked about the cooking ingredients? So similar thing, here if you're in the fourth jhana, and you want to go to the third jhana, what do I need to grab from the shelf and add? Yeah, sukha. I just reach for my sukha, and I pour in the sukha, and fourth jhana plus sukha should deliver you to the third jhana. So a handy trick, but again part of the R of all this, and also just the malleability of perception, and the R of playing with perception. I think I mentioned this already, but it's worth stating again. Probably over time it's probably not just one or two experiences, but probably over more repeated experiences with the third and fourth jhana, and the deeper jhanas from three onwards. Their increased refinement, they're actually then retroactively so much, as when you come back to the pete and the first jhana, they will usually have the effect of refining the pete in the first jhana, of actually calming it, that's one thing, and then maybe refining it as well, but calming it definitely, but also refining it. So when you go to these other jhanas, probably repeatedly, and then come back, it's like your sense of what the first jhana is begins to change. Again, that's part of why the post-it notes. And that may happen with other jhanas, with the sukha, etc. So I don't need to repeat this, but just to include it, so that all the business about mastery goes here as well. So of all the things, all the elements of mastery, you can play with them here. They're just the same. Ability to sustain, ability to summon at will, ability to ping pong, ability to go for walks, outside, etc., all the rest of it. Because you know you've got more jhanas to play with at this point, there's increased leapfrog ping pong permutation possibilities. You can be jumping all over and practice that. And again, once you get to this point, you want to be practicing a little bit at the end, just having some fun at the end of sittings, sort of moving around and seeing how rapidly you can move. But mostly you want to be marinating, and really marinating this, it does something very, again, profound to the consciousness, to the being. Okay. Good. Let's have some quiet together. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Thank you everyone. Thank you. Thanks.

 Okay, so before we start today, I've got a request actually. So you may or may not have realized, but we're not alone at Gaia House in terms of there are other retreatants here. There's people on personal retreat and people on work retreat, and there's been a request to please not talk outside of the Q&A period and interviews, and I don't know what exactly is happening or in your work periods or something. So for their sake, who, you know, naturally expected to come on a silent retreat, but also for your sake, there's this idea of actually letting things build, letting the energies build if it's, you know, when there's happiness and of course appreciation, very natural human, you want to share that or talk, but, and that's important, of course, is important part of being human, but in this practice, we're also wanting to let the energies build and not squander them so much. There will be a chance to talk at the end, share time together verbally at the end of the retreat, but unless it's talking about with each other about the work and what needs doing right then about whatever yogi job you're doing, just to repeat the initial agreement to sustain silence together. And can you feel together in that silence? Do I need to speak and be heard and exchange that to feel connected? One of the opportunities, I think I already somehow came up in a Q&A, in a longer, as a retreat gets longer, we get more sensitive and part of that, the gift of that sensitivity is that we can feel each other more deeply, more widely, more completely, more openly and sensitively, and we don't need to talk necessarily. They even need to talk to someone or hear their story or hear whatever to sense how they're doing and their personhood and the particular flavors of their being and to sense that connection and the way it can, one can feel very connected across space without all that. So I don't know the details but the other resident teacher has obviously heard from some yogis or encountered something, so there's a request to all of us to kind of uphold, re- revisit that commitment together and keep that. And if it feels like, oh but it's such a nice connection, then I invite you to see, to remind yourself you can have that verbal connection at the end of the retreat with each other and to see how connected can you feel without words. And it's to do with the same qualities really that we're bringing, if you want to feel connected, that we're bringing to this kind of practice anyway and to me that are part of what we bring to any practice, sensitivity, openness, receptivity, attunement, etc etc. It's all the same thing and if a certain period is a time when you don't want to do that, is it not recording? If a certain period is when you don't want to do that, then you just shift the balance of the attention. So if you are feeling like, yeah you're really enjoying and appreciating each other and the connection, let that be more prominent. I'm washing dishes and whatever and there can be the eye contact and smiling if you want without the expectation that it comes back, but the emphasis on the attention is more on that sense of connection and appreciating it and feeling it with the whole body and resonating it. You can get exquisitely sensitive. Some of you know this on long retreat, you might be sitting right here at the front and I don't know how many yards it is to the back of the hall. Someone comes in quietly and you know who it is and how does that happen? If I'm just yap yapping all the time, I won't develop that kind of sensitivity. So you can play with the balance of attention in terms of if I want that connection, then I can be a little more open. If I want, I'm more inner, maybe I'm working with my primary nematome, maybe I'm processing something inside, maybe I just need to collect my mind and be mindful, whatever it is, then the balance is more inside. Again, it's just context. So it's never the case that we want never to talk to anyone, although the Buddha seemed to recommend that almost as a preference for his monks and nuns, but we want to have this freedom and this capacity to do things differently at different times. Really, really important part of expanding our range and expanding our freedom. So we can just revisit that together. Okay, good. Okay, so I've got just a few questions from people and we can take some verbal, some life ones. I have a question. Is this from you? Okay, is there anything anyone would like to ask? Oh, I just want to call first, so why don't you... So last night before sleeping, I had a Vitaka and Vichara attack, which is a great time to have right before you go to sleep, but really appreciating the whole jhana system, kind of a bunch of things you said all came into order and just really feeling like this thing is really brilliant. And particularly I've been struck by when you said the most important thing about the jhanas is working towards a goal and who actually believes me. And I raised my hand and then as soon as I raised my hand I was like, if Rob asked me why I would have no idea. It's just this instinctual hand-raising. So as it all came together last night, I was, you know, it was long and extended, but the short of it is basically the Buddha setting up worked towards a goal, but the goal necessitates that you let go of clinging and aversion and even delusion and get more and more and more subtle. So all the ways that you would naturally go towards a goal, you're asked to let go of in order to complete that goal. And then along the way you make the world over and over and over again through dependent origination and you see that either through hindrances where you create a hell realm or through beauty. And I was like, mind blown. But the thing that I'm grappling with, after you gave that talk about desire, it struck me so deep. I actually went to my room and I just wept for an hour and I haven't ever had that kind of response and retreat. And I was like, it disturbs not in a necessarily a bad way, but in this like deep in my belly kind of way and went through a whole process. And in one, from one way of looking, I could see it as a sort of self-doubt, hindrance attack. But at this other way of looking, it's like I felt how important intention and desire is. I mean, I've been listening to you say it for years, like desire is a maker of worlds. And I'm like, yeah. But then I got it and I was like, oh. And that's really where I'm struggling with, like I can see if I looked at it one way, it's like amazing. Like what can I do? But I'm actually just having this response of the gravity of like, can I live up to my desire and and stick with that intention? Like being on this retreat, it's been so beautiful to have the intention so strongly held. And then I leave and it's a world where, you know, literally, you know, on one level, you know, your attention and your desires being grabbed at, you know, everywhere. And so it's just, yeah, I'm just really wondering if there's words around the gravity of intention and grappling with like that. Thank you, Nicole. Do you mean, I just want to try to make sure I understand. So you mean in your life, the question is really about now that I've seen how important it is to kind of honor my desire in the deepest sense of the word honor and ought to deeply honor my deepest desires. How, and that's, I see how difficult that is to do in the world with different things pulling what would support that. Is that what you're asking? I think there's just a lot of self-doubt coming, like just deep rooted, like can I, my desire is strong and deep and I don't, it's fast and it's like, yes, I desire the jhanas, but way more than the jhanas. And it's from mystery and beauty and these things that, do I even know the definition or the depth of which they go? No, I don't. And yet seeing how intention is going to make my life, I'm just feeling like, can I, like I want it and can I do that? And there's just pain around that. The pain is around not knowing whether you can and the self-doubt with it. Yeah, feeling the desire and not knowing about it. So I don't know you that well, but to the degree that I know you, it seems like you have done that pretty well in your life so far, but I don't know if you would agree with that, because I don't know you that well yet. Yeah, I can, I guess I can see both. There's times that I've done it very well and times that I failed and I think the times when it fails is very painful and not so much the not getting the thing, but seeing how I've let intentions fray. Yeah, okay. So you know with something, I mean there's so much to say about this, but I think what you just said is maybe the key thing. Rather than get into, I failed or I didn't fail, it's like what just happened there? And what just happened there might be over the last 10 years with a certain desire or it might be in one interaction. I had a certain desire in a certain situation and well, I just got completely sidetracked or blocked or afraid or inhibited or lost my risk-taking capability. You know, so to me I wonder from what you're saying whether the most important thing is learning from one of the most important things is learning from when you feel like you haven't lived up to that. Is that, is that, just wondering if that's distracting people or not, it seems okay. It's really okay with me as long as it's not. Okay, so sorry, sorry, it's really okay. It was just, it's just a couple, so yeah, I find it helpful too, but it was just people were looking a lot, so okay. No, please, please do stay. I didn't mean to, okay. Did he really want to be in here? Maybe he wanted to leave. So, yeah, maybe one of the most important things is actually learning from, from what you think is, when something feels like you haven't lived up to that, you know, what, what exactly just happened? Was it fear? Was it, and then fear of what, you know, what kind of thoughts? What was I believing? Inhibition? Was it, you know, desire has a lot to do with risk-taking as well. How, you know, how willing am I to feel a fear and just to take a risk, you know, and, and that could be a long-term vision risk, or it could be something in the moment, depending on the whole setup of the situation, you know. You know, so in, on a big scale, I can think of several junctures in my life where I've really, things were, I mean, I shared one about going, going to do music, you know, things were really looking very promising from a certain social perspective in a certain realm and just went to do something where I was like, what are you doing? You know, that's the kind of long-term risk thing or other, so, or it could be very much in the moment that one's not, you know, one's afraid of taking certain risks, but, but to identify what just happened if you really feel like, oh, I got lost there, something happened and I didn't live up to my intentions. The other, you know, just to put, so that's one thing, another thing to pull out from what you said is, is this business, I don't quite know even what I'm desiring, you know, to me that's okay and, and you're familiar with the soul-making teacher, that would actually go with the Eros. Eros will create and discover beyonds that are actually, some of which are completely nebulous, you know, in terms, I just have a sense of gorgeous luminous divinities that I don't quite, I couldn't articulate them, I can't even differentiate them in my, in my sense of them and that's pulling me and that's completely okay, you know, but on the way to that I do want to be, it wants to translate into actual practical action. In other words, a full spectrum of desire, full spectrum of Eros has both very clear choices that it's asking me to make here and now perhaps or later and kind of more, more nebulous ones later on. Does that make sense? And, and that whole thing is, is part of the fullness of it. There's also such a thing as it's, you know, it's to me worth desiring and worth longing for and worth risking something that may well not pay off, that you may well not ever get. So one, one check, you know, it's like, check that's part of the whole mix as well. Is it okay not to get this thing and yet still to give myself completely to it, you know. Again, if we think imaginably, you know, then if there's desire and Eros for something, there will be in that whole constellation an image or images associated with that very desire. The angel who wants that, the self that's desire, something out of the very fire, out of the very fire of the desire and the Eros, there should constantly other images which can, which want you to move towards that or something that beckons you from, from what it is that you love and long for. Does that make sense? And they can take very, you know, potent imaginal forms and so let them, let them do that as well. And then it relates to someone else's question as well, you know, if you really want certain things in life, you're going to piss some people off and disappoint some people and people will consider you selfish or this or that or people will consider you maybe, depending on what you want, some people will consider you, why is she less available? Why is she this or that for me, for them, whatever. And that's also part of what you have to deal with, you know. You can't satisfy everyone and so depending on your kind of, I don't know what to call it, relational empathic sensitivity, which you may have to quite a degree, you're actually going to feel the pain of that quite a lot and you're very easy for you to feel guilty and feel like you have to take care of this person or that person or why you're not available or why you're choosing to do this rather than that. So that's a way often that deep, deep strong desires get sidetracked, that we feel beholden in a way to explain ourselves or to give people or this or that something else what they want. So it's hard, it's hard to be in the world and it's even harder when people don't really understand what it is you're desiring or they don't value it or they can't, they think it's a kind of, you know, not that worthwhile or whatever, you know, or they don't think you'll be able to get it, lots of things, you know. So that's quite hard, you know, someone who's more kind of, I don't know what the word is, not emotionally less sensitive, emotionally less pulled on in relationship, you know, by others needs and wishes and pain actually has an easier time with that, you know. So I don't know, is any of this addressing what you're... Yeah, it is. We could probably talk all day and night about it, because it's a huge subject, but is there any more you want to say? No, I think that's it. Okay, then one more thing, you know, so it sounds like what happened was potent, you know, there was... and in that potency, again, there's lots of different things going on. So one of the things that was going on was this self-doubt, you know, but I would wager there were lots of other things going on, and some of them were probably very beautiful and probably very empowering. And, you know, this ability, again, same deal, it's like, okay, all this is going on, you could actually visit every frequency and emotion that had been going on in there, but some of them, when you get to them, will be very potentially empowering, like I said. So here's a self-doubt, obviously that's potentially disempowering, it needs attention, partly for that very reason, I need to understand it. But there might be within it just, for example, here's this thing I really, really want, and I feel that wanting. And in that wanting, another way of saying it is, here's this thing I'm devoted to, yeah? And that devotion, or this devotion and this longing, I can feel energetically, I can feel emotionally and energetically, and that's something that I can really sit with. And so, even if what I want is actually vague, I'm not yet clear, but the fire of it is clear, and the energy of it is clear, and the devotion in it is clear. So rather than worrying too much about getting the clarity right now about what the object is, I can come back and be with my sense of devotion, which I might even get, at first it feels like it's just, it's somewhere in the mass of burning and confused, you know, somewhere in there is my devotion. And when I sit with my devotion, it naturally somardifies the being around it, it harmonizes and energizes, and I can feel that uprightness. And the longer I sit with that, with that uprightness and that sense of devotion, and I let it shape my energy body, and that's a kind of prayer, even though I'm not clear exactly what I'm praying to. It does something to the body and the psyche, you know, regularly sitting in that and feeling one's alignment. So you can do that for a long time, you can do that for a short time, but it will do something. Yeah, that's a bit what happened. It was useful to look for the hindrance in it, and then sort of tend to that, which I did by devoting this retreat to a teacher that I mentor who suffers from self-doubt a lot, and so I sort of bring her into the sits, especially when that comes up, and kind of for that part of it, use that. And then a kind of fire of devotion. I was aware that once that was taken care of, there was actually, it was vague, but a sense of what I was longing for, at least just in kind of the energy body, and that really actually kicked the practice into another gear the next day after that. But it kind of came back last night as the sort of system of jhanas and what we're doing and maybe why you said that thing about why working towards a goal is so important. So it wobbles. What's wobbling? Going between kind of feeling overwhelmed by the power of that desire and can I meet it and just feeling the power of the desire. It kind of wobbles back. Yeah, and again, if we just talk about imaginal practice, the very doubt and wobble and fear and whatever it is, if I let myself go into that, out of that will come an image. The one who potentially, the one who in relation to what they love most deeply and long for feels very unsure of themselves. That the dukkha of that can take, you have to go into it though. You're not trying to pacify it or talk your way or reassure it. You're actually letting that constantly as an image. So yeah, it might get clear what I'm desiring, but it also gets clear just the desire itself and I begin to trust that more and more and let that empower the whole being. Okay great, yeah we could talk a lot more but that's good. Some other people had their hands up earlier. Victor, yeah please. I wanted to tease out the term equanimity. I think, I mean you've mentioned it a few times and I think you said the ordinary use in English of equanimity doesn't quite cover what happens in johann estates. I was struck by how from what I gather, Biku Analiel uses the term equipoise as the translation of a pekka and I think because he says equanimity as a term can have a dampening effect. Thoughts? Yeah, thank you. I'm going to talk more about equanimity tomorrow but we can say a few things now. So equanimity as a term in English, I'm not sure if I even heard it before a Buddhist sort of speak, but what's called the near enemy in dharma of equanimity is indifference. So that may be what Analiel is pointing to, something that can look like equanimity but actually it's a little bit... Actually I think he said it in the context that pleasure could be seen in the context of well there's pleasure here but dukkha somewhere else. So it takes the brightness off the term equanimity compared to equipoise which is sort of like a balanced stance. Yeah, okay. I'm really happy with the word equipoise. I'm not sure about the word equanimity. Equanimize equals soul, equal animation is probably what it comes from. So equal what passion? So does that take the brightness off or does it not take the brightness off? Equanimity is actually, we can talk about it very briefly or we can talk really really a lot about it and it's actually once we start inquiring is actually quite complex. So I'm trying to remember, I think upekha, I think somewhere or other where I trace the word. Now I can't remember, I think in Sanskrit upekha and the iksha, upa iksha and I think that's to do equal seeing. So seeing things equally. So you could say it's equally poised in the sense of there's a balance between this and that and even between pain and pleasure and so at one level, yeah, that would be a good translation. Here I perceive pleasure, here I perceive dukkha or whatever and the being is equipoised. It's not leaning towards the pleasure or away from the dukkha at one level. Yeah, that would be a good word. It's a balance of mind, something like that. And that's good at a certain level. That's really fine at a certain level. I'm just wondering whether we should talk about now wait till tomorrow. I'm happy for you to wait. Yeah, let's see. I mean, I also, for me the bigger picture is the effect of the term equanimity in Buddhist communities in relation to climate issues. Yeah, yeah. So you know, that's the background. Okay, yeah, thank you. Yeah, I don't actually use the term much. I actually think equanimity is a bit of a, it doesn't really exist, which I'll explain, I hope. But the other thing is exactly because of that because it very easily becomes a shadow in Buddhist, for Buddhists. So that equanimity in relation to something like climate change is very easily goes to a kind of indifference, or to whatever, you know, whatever social injustice, racial injustice could be anything. So it's a really, we have to be really careful. Now, of course, everyone, we all teach that the near enemy of equanimity is indifference. It doesn't, it's still there as a really dangerous edge. So there's one, maybe say this, there's one level of equanimity, as I said, which is a kind of important, but more superficial level. So when the Buddha talks about equanimity in terms of the eight worldly conditions, have you heard that? Praise, blame, success, failure, gain, loss, and pleasure, pain. And then we could put this word, this other translation, equipoise. And so a good practitioner at this superficial level of understanding, a good practitioner, views those things is kind of indifferent in the best sense of the word between, between, you know, doesn't mind if it's success or failure, doesn't mind if it's gain or loss, doesn't mind if it's praise or blame. At one level, of course, we can refine that a little bit and say even with relation to climate change, yes, I care. And this is how it should be equanimity in the context of the Brahma Vahara, equanimity in the context of really caring passionately, you know, really with a lot of meta, with a lot of compassion for what's happening in the world and the suffering that something like climate change will, will is already delivering for so many people. There is the compassion, ideally there is the meta, there should also be the engagement as well. And it might be that the ship is sinking and that's where the equanimity comes in, that one, one isn't going to be, one isn't going to be incapacitated in one's efforts or totally incapacitated by grief and disempowered by grief or worry or fear. That's the best sense of equanimity at that level. Does that make sense? But then there's a whole other level of equanimity, which I think maybe I'll speak about tomorrow and that has more to do with this other possible etymology, Iksha in Sanskrit and Iksha is seeing things equally. And but that we're getting into equanimity as we get into the third Jhana, which I already talked about, and then more in the fourth Jhana and then as we relate to insight. So I think I'll say it very briefly. Okay. If I, let's take this basically, I'm going to take this polarity, pleasure and pain or pleasant and unpleasant in a way I've already said this. And if I practice, so the usual reaction to the pleasant is to want it and to try and hold it and to try and grasp it and try and bring it towards me. And the usual reaction to the unpleasant is to try and push it away. And push and pull of grasping an aversion to the degree that they are present in the consciousness at any moment is the degree to which equanimity is not present. You could define it that way. Does that make sense? So that as, as I practice in one way or another, letting go of any in, in the moment, this is not a way to live one's life. It's completely not a way to live one's life. It's a practice in the moment of letting go of any pushing away of anything that I noticed at any level in the moment and letting go or calming any pulling towards me or hanging on at any level in the moment. If I just practice that and there's lots of different ways of doing that. If I just practice that, then I notice there's a calming in the being and that calming is part of what equanimity is and looks like, but it doesn't stop there. If I keep doing it, I will then begin to notice that the very perception, which may be the ichsha, the eyes, the seeing of the pleasant and unpleasant begins to change. The very sense of them begins to change and what's pleasant becomes eventually, what's unpleasant becomes less unpleasant and what's pleasant may for a little while get more pleasant and then it, then it becomes more, it goes towards more neutral till in the end, actually everything becomes a kind of neither pleasant nor unpleasant vedana, but it doesn't stop there either. It goes even deeper and if I keep doing this and keep doing this, the actual sensation begins to disappear. So we've gone, you're letting go of really, really, you know, at more and more deep and subtle levels that we're letting go of push pull, letting go of push pull, letting go of push pull. And so it's gone way beyond a state of calmness in response to or a state of okayness in response to pleasure and pain. It's actually affecting or fabricating the very perceptions of pleasure and pain. Is this making sense? Does it make sense? Vaguely, theoretically. Yes. These are practices and I can say this, you know, a thousand times until you have the, until you actually know how to practice this, put it into practice and see it for yourself and there's a whole range here. And so eventually what happens is not just pleasure and pain disappear, but the very sensations disappear and then actually the very world disappears. Self disappears, world disappears, etc. All time disappears. In that state, we're not talking about equanimity in relation to anything that's pleasant or unpleasant, but it's, but it's a deep level of equanimity. That's partly why I think equanimity is, is actually a thing that doesn't exist because by the time you got real equanimity, there's nothing to be a quantumist about. But anyway, so equanimity is a big subject, it's complex and it has, it's very much interwoven with the territory we'll get onto as we go onto the fourth genre and the other genres and how that meets with insight. But in terms of what you're saying about climate change, I know, you know, what concern that is for you and how passionate and dedicated you are and also living in Australia where there's really not that much consciousness, it seems about it at the moment. It's really, really important, you know, that, that, that, that, you know, we don't use, and it could be in any spiritual tradition that we don't use certain teachings to go, you know, brush over or hide, you know, our noblest responses, etc. Yeah. Thanks. Okay. Yeah. Is that, is that Monica at the back? Please. Yeah. Thank you, Rob, for mentioning the push and pull, which you also spoke about when you described the third genre. And when you mentioned in the third genre, you mentioned something like a peacefulness that arises from quietening the push and pull. And I have a question regarding that because if I remember correctly, when you read the description of the first genre, there was something in the lines of secluded from the hindrances. So I was under the impression that we were done with the push and pull in the first genre already, because a version and greed in the version weren't present anymore, which, which are the push and pull. So if, if we're already secluded from the hindrances, where is this push and pull coming from? Yeah, yeah. I'm confused. Yeah, thank you. It's really important. So yeah, it depends. I use the word clinging, and push and pull is just another word for clinging for me. But I use that word in a very elastic way, so that there are very obvious manifestations of clinging, very obvious manifest like the hindrances, for instance, but that's really just one level. Okay. And as you say, when we let go of the hindrances, a certain amount of clinging, a certain amount of push pull has has gone from our experience, but it's enough that then the being in the energy body and the being feel really good. First genre kind of arises. But as I use that word as having all kinds of a range of depths and subtlety, that it's, I don't know, maybe in the Dharma world, there's a lot of teachings that don't use that word so much. It stays like quite a gross thing. Either there is clinging or there isn't. And then not often goes with teaching that either there is a self, the self was there or it's not. But I view all these words, self and clinging and all of that as spectra. And they go really, really, really subtle. So that by the time we get to the third or fourth genre, the amount of push and pull is way less. So even though, yeah, so let's say that, but even there, and I'll repeat this as we get as we get into more territory, it doesn't stop there. It goes the there's really, really subtle clinging and push pull even in the fourth genre. Now a lot of I'm, I'm sure a lot of people wouldn't agree, but that's how I that's how I use those words. So well, how does that sound for now? Yeah, I understand. So it's really the degree of pushing for the wearing the spectrum we are exactly. Yeah, yeah. That becomes more and more subtle levels. Yeah. And in a way you could say one way of understanding what's happening in the genres is that we're just letting go of clinging at, at a deeper level or two more refined, refined things that we hadn't, we didn't, because how do you cling to consciousness or so we tend to think of clinging as I said, as or in English and in a lot of Dharma, it refers to something that's actually quite gross, clinging craving and all that, but I really mean them as open ended terms. Let's just see where the limit is. And it's the very, it, a, the stillness and subtlety of the attention that allows us to see where that clinging is more subtly, but be it's also framing the teachings from the beginning in a way that that doesn't define things in a limited way. So if I define clinging as something grows, then I'm not going to look for any, any subtle, but any, any more subtle clinging. But if I define it in this more open way right from the beginning, then it's a question of, Oh, well maybe there's more. I have to get still and sensitive. So I have to get down to a certain level of very little clinging to see when there's even less. Does that make sense? So that's the kind of way I like to present things. That whole process is that investigation of letting go of more and more clinging is what I would call an insight investigation. So like as any insight way of looking, which means any insight practice as I would frame it and teach it is, is doing just that in one way or another. That's exact. That's the primary thing it's doing. It may look like it's doing something very different, but that's primarily what it's doing. And then at certain points you can kind of, you may just be able to follow the same practice into deeper and deeper or more and more subtle levels of clinging, deeper and deeper letting go, or you may need to kind of tweak the practice a little bit so that, so that you can get into the subtler and subtler levels of letting go. The way we're practicing Jhana at the moment is we're not really thinking so much about letting go of clinging and where's the clinging. But there is a way, and I hope to get to on this retreat, there is a way of practicing Jhana where that's actually how you move from one Jhana to another. You identify the clinging and you let go and you can just keep and let go and that takes you to another level. But at the moment that's not really how we're approaching things. We're approaching more through just getting into it, letting it ripen, enjoying it, opening to it. So in a way we're approaching more just trusting the samadhi intention of enjoying and getting into something and trusting that will naturally ripen in this process. So when I mentioned the other day that the equanimity of the third Jhana arises from attenuating the push-pull, in a way that's more just a, let's understand kind of technically what's really happening here. For most of us, for most of you at this point, the methodology to get to the third Jhana is actually more through just getting to the second Jhana and really get satisfied. Now we could see that satisfaction as because I'm satisfied I don't need to push-pull so much anymore. So it's a deep level of letting go of push-pull but it's not the end of it, you know, there's more, it gets subtler than it is. So that point was more just a kind of wanting to be really precise about understanding things and trying to weave things together in terms of understanding, less about the practice. Does that make sense? Okay, good. Thank you. Yes, you're welcome. Oh, is it more? Since I have the microphone. Okay, yeah, sure. Because I wanted to, I don't know if it's really a question or a comment but it's, I benefit from having the microphone because I already had this in my mind too, and it's following up from what Nicole was commenting on desire. And I have been reflecting on this over the years and some of your talks where you ask what do you really want, what do you want, and the other day what's your deepest desire, what's your calling? And the question that came to my mind was about the fabricated nature of desire because as I reflect on my own desire it has evolved over time since I first started to practice over the years. To a large degree influenced by what I've been exposed to and accounts of great enlightened beings and great masters and your own accounts. And you said something to that yesterday when you mentioned, when you said something like it depends what you've been exposed to. I don't see my notes right now but something I'm paraphrasing. So when I ask myself that question, what am I deciding? It's not like there is something there that is my desire that I'm trying to discover or get to but that it is fabricated, that I am creating my desire. So I don't know if it's so much of a question but is there anything you would say to that? I would and in fact somehow you've brought it up with me before and so in the last series of talks that I recorded at home I spent about half an hour answering that but it's there somewhere. Don't ask me which talk it's in, somewhere in 45 hours. You'll find it at some point I guess. But just to say something quickly now, yeah, so again a little bit relates to what Marco was asking yesterday. We could say desire is fabricated but if our understanding of that or if we're holding that as a view ends up disempowering our desire and say well it's all fabricated so I just, you know, that's not a very helpful view. Other times regarding my desire for this or that as fabricated is really skillful because it helps me let go of what's probably a desire that's just going to make me just, you know, maybe give me a little sugar hit but is actually miserable. So are some of our, are many of our desires more? You know, what desires are, yeah, gosh, can you get through a day out there without being, you know, assaulted by a million advertisements? And then we move in whatever culture you move in tells you, as you said, you get exposed to not even stories it's just like how people walk or how people talk or how people, you know, present their emotional range. We're barraged by that, you know, all through. So just to say, yeah, that's absolutely true. I would turn the question around and say okay what, of all these different desires and these moving desires that I notice in myself, you know, they change over time is really changing where I am and whatever. Two things. When they, this goes back to Nicole's question, when they move can I notice what was significant in moving them? So for example I have this great desire and someone just or a couple of people just say something and it's a little bit ridiculing and then I find that my desire is gone. It could be a million different things. Or I have this desire and I'm just relaxing watching TV and I have a beer or whatever it is and then the desire is gone and somehow it wasn't there the next day or it isn't there the next day. So once investigating the conditions that actually it's a hard thing if we go back to what we said with Nicole, it's a hard thing if desire is a flame it's a hard thing to not get blown out, you know, and then all kinds of other flames are ignited by things that, you know, advertisements and peer pressure and who knows what, you know, and indoctrination from cultures and subcultures we're in. But that's one thing to actually investigate what moves it, what blows it out, you know. But the second thing with that I think is investigating the sense of a desire, okay, and I think if you compare your desire for, you know, two different things and obviously ridiculous example would be your desire to have eat a certain food or whatever versus something else. You can actually feel when a desire is deeper in you, okay, and there's a qualitative and quantitative difference but we need to really begin sensing into the differences there and learning to kind of notice, tune into and take care of the deeper desires, you know. But introspectively there should be differences that you can tell. But that's a short answer for now and there is really, and I was thinking very much because somehow it had come up between us at some point and I devoted a chunk of time to it on those recordings. And the other thing with all this is, you know, some people have patterns, in fact it's quite common to have patterns that, so we, this is a genre tree, not a desire tree, but anyway, because I have talked about it a lot and I think it's important but I don't want to spend the whole time talking about it, but it's good to know oneself in relation to desire and what I see is that that's quite rare as well. That a person really knows, I know my patterns with desire. It's not that I know what I want but I actually know what happens in me with desires. So some people, the flame can't get going. Some people the flame goes and they can't tolerate it. Some people get confused or distracted by other, you know, ignitions that get thrown from all kinds of other. Some people the flame bursts up and then somehow they don't really follow through. Well they say, I'm going to do this and I'm going to do that, and it doesn't really follow through. What's happened? What happened over those months or whatever it is that there isn't the, that one isn't a person of one's word, you know. So it's really good to know oneself in relation to these things, I think. It's really, really important. And I'm, you know, I really meant it the other day when I said in terms of significance of teachings this is a much more significant teachings than anything I might tell you about how to move from one genre to another. Maybe even in the jhanas themselves, you know. In fact I would say that. It's like really understanding ourselves and really becoming mature in relation to desire and it's huge. But there's a lot of aspects to that. A lot, lot, lot of aspects to it. And I've spoken about it a lot, so on recordings and things. Is that okay for now? Yeah. I think. Okay. I've got a couple of written ones. Should I do that or is someone else right now? I've got a couple from you here as well. Let me do someone else's one and then we'll come back. So I'm exploring sukha and its different nuances. The buoyant and bubbly and more recently its soft gentle aspect. I'm enjoying it. I feel absorbed into it but a question keeps arising for me again and again about the difference between a mental feeling and a physical one. What is a mental feeling or an emotion exactly? What is a mental feeling or an emotion exactly? I thought that all feelings could only actually be felt in the body. I do have a sense of feeling the mental aspect slash emotion but it's not really clear where in the body I'm feeling it. It just feels all over. So it's harder to probe than with the PT. Yesterday you spoke about tuning into a frequency in the energy body which I do but isn't the energy body just imaginary? Maybe I'm just experiencing hindrance of doubt. If you can distill this somewhat lengthy question and offer any answers that will be much appreciated. Yeah. This is important. Thank you. So there's a few questions sort of woven in there. So what is a mental feeling or an emotion exactly? It's a really complex thing is what it is. Usually I would say an emotion has several aspects to it. It usually has some kind of thought content or a type of thought content associated with it. Of course once you get into the jhana then it's like emotions free of thoughts. It also usually has a kind of texture of the mind. It's like the mind feels like it has a certain texture to it agitated or spacious or calm or whatever but even more subtle than that. But it also has a bodily aspect to it. So at least those three aspects plus probably beliefs and the whole network of other things are a part of the complexes that we call emotions. This business about a sukkar is an emotional thing and PT. Two things about that. One is it's a thing from Abhidhamma. So I don't necessarily subscribe to that. Abhidhamma is Buddhist psychology and it tends to have a certain way of framing things that sometimes it's useful and I find is sometimes really not useful. So it's classified that when sukkar or something like that, this is a mental feeling. This is a this, this is a that. They like putting things in categories and it's all very sort of black and white and very simple sounding but there's lots and lots of categories of different things. So an emotion to me is actually a complex thing. When we get down to jhanic emotion like let's say the sukkar, in a way you're talking about a simpler thing but I would still say it has, it's felt two ways. It's felt in the body and again in jhanic terms that's the primary thing because every time the Buddha says with the first four jhanas the practitioner pervades and permeates the fuses and saturates drenches and steeps and etc. their whole body with that quality. So most people I think who haven't practiced meditation or energy body awareness would just be a bit baffled by that. What does it mean to have let's say happiness in one's whole body. I mean some people might get it but generally it's and then to focus on that but this is really the primary thing in jhana practice. It's that energetic vibration, the energy body vibration so to speak or frequency which is an aspect of an emotion. Now there's a mental one as well. Where is that mental one? Well it's in the mind but where is the mind? I don't know. It doesn't really matter. What matters in terms of practice is the primary thing is body, body, body, energy, body, energy, body, energy, body. Where it is in the body so once it's spread and let me backtrack and say one more thing about this pete and sukha as I said it already. So at first when people are opening to all this I will say something like pete is a physical feeling and then sukha is an emotional one. It's a white lie. It's just something that helps people differentiate those two at first but after a while you'll be like well actually they're both kind of physical. They're just different vibrations physically or different ranges of vibrations physically. So it was just a little piggyback idea but basically they're vibrations in the body. And then the second sort of piece of question here. I do have a sense of feeling the mental aspect of emotion but it's not really clear where in the body I'm feeling it. It just feels all over. So that's perfect. That's what we want. For me it pervades the whole body. That's exactly what we want. I feel it all over. Even homogenously all over. So it's harder to probe than with the pete. Not necessarily. So sometimes when the pete or the sukha, when it feels stronger in some place so you've got three scenarios. You've got a scenario that hasn't spread yet and it won't spread this session and then okay that's where I do my probing obviously. I stopped trying to spread it but that's where I do my probing. You've got a second scenario where it's spread but it's not 100% homogenous. And then I take the strongest area and that's where I do my probing. That make sense? And the third scenario is it's completely spread and it's completely homogenous. And then I just choose a random place. It doesn't matter if it's homogenous and I just go into it at one point. It's like a person diving into a swimming pool. They're diving in at one point but once they dive in or a lake, once they dive in then that very diving, that very penetrating might make them feel like they're in a different terrain. It might take them to another level at that process. So you don't have to. You can just choose any place and do that. Yesterday you spoke about tuning into a frequency in the energy body which I do but isn't the energy body just imaginary? Well the energy body is no more imaginary than anything else is imaginary. So again it's one of those things it's like sometimes it's really helpful for me I feel or for I sense for a particular person at a particular time to take the energy body as a real thing. And of course there's loads of schools of yoga and healing and all kinds of things that it's shamanistic healing that take the energy body as a real thing. That's fine. I'm a little talk about subtle body or energy body and it's rarefied. It's fine but I really think that has limits. The thing about the energy body or one of the things about the energy body that's really important to understand is that it's very amenable to our imagination. So that's not quite the same thing as saying it's totally imaginary because when we say something is imaginary we tend to then poo-poo it relative to something else. That's why I say it's as imaginary as anything else maybe. But the energy body as we're playing with it is very sensitive and susceptible and responsive to our imagination. So that if I imagine the energy moving in a certain way from my energy body low and behold that's what I will experience in the energy body if I keep doing that. Makes sense? So and then with other people or the same person at a different time it's like okay enough now with this kind of rarefying of the energy body. You've been doing that for years and again the whole it's a bit like what Jason was asking or someone else about locks and unblocking things. One can get kind of obsessed about this as if the whole of practice is sort of getting my energy body to feel a certain way. So for those people I might say it's not a real thing actually what's more deeply real or more usefully seen as real is just the idea that we're playing with perception. So I don't think it's doubt so much as some clarity was needed there. Does that sound okay? I can't see back there can you just yes? Okay good thank you. Okay very good. I think these are useful anyway so I'm going for other people so I'm going to see. Which Jhana does that second bright light nimitta appear in? So the bright light is quite common for some people can appear in any Jhana or even before a Jhana. It's just it's what I call a secondary nimitta. It's just an indication that the samadhi is going well. So some people get it it's very associated with the first Jhana some people it only comes in the fourth Jhana some people it never comes some you know some people it's just their excess concentration or whatever. So it's not particular to a Jhana it's just a it's a secondary nimitta and in other words it's not it's not of primary importance unless we really mix it with the primary nimitta and get and get into it that way. And second question did you say that Jhana's one to four had equanimity in them? No I didn't say that but the Buddha said Jhana's three and four had equanimity in them but I was saying well hold on that's a little misleading so we really need to unpack a what's primary in Jhana's three and four it's the peacefulness and I'll explain that Jhana for tomorrow and unpack this whole idea of equanimity because as we've been talking about a little bit today it's it's actually quite a complex idea and we need to kind of go a little more carefully. From another point of view in relating to Monica's question yeah you could say each Jhana has some degree of equanimity to it because equanimity most things are not on off switches either you have equanimity or you don't you have some degree of equanimity. So the first Jhana even when it's you know you have to peel me off the ceiling because it's just ecstasy like that it's actually got some degree of equanimity in it in relation to other things you know. So a lot of these things a lot of a lot of dharma concepts are really not on off black or white they're really spectra and and if we if we think of them as on off we're actually a bit like what I said about clinging or self. So a lot of people report I was meditating and then there was no self. I did it and it's like no think about it more as a spectrum because what you're calling no self at the moment is actually just a much less fabricated sense of self it's just lower down on the spectrum and if I have that idea of spectrum repeating what I said before in relation to equanimity in relation to self in relation to clinging all these other words then actually that's going to make me it's going to enable me to notice way more than I would have noticed if I was just had a view either there is self well there isn't self in a moment either self is being fabricated or isn't either there's equanimity or there isn't. So this idea of a spectrum which just goes subtler and subtler and it's part of the beauty in the art to trace it and understand it that's really really important. So something else. Oh I thought you had another question. Is she allowed another one. Shall we vote. Yeah go for it. Go for it. I think this question is about like territories territory and responsiveness and I've been thinking a lot of this retreat I've been trying to figure out how to stay in one territory and I'm working in the third in the third genre space and I'm just I'm wondering about when you talked about contentment being one of those things one of the levels I've been following I noticed that there are edges I drop out into another space and one of them is with the contentment and I'm just trying I'm really like trying to figure out the edge of where that is and it and I have like how far down to go in my experience of what's coming up in terms of contentment there and I noticed like in the middle range there's like it there's a very kind of like that kind of very the way very much describe the atmosphere of that space of the third genre like with contentment and then when I go lower so there was a kind of sense of like perfect contentment like that's the kind of like kind of quite light feeling of it but then I noticed I can go really very very low with the contentment and still have a still have the qualities of like like the sukka and peacefulness but like the contentment is quite a lot bigger and I'm and it's more a kind of like deep well of rich contentment feeling rather than like perfect contentment kind of thing and I'm just wondering how is that still within the range? When you go deeper the contentment is not perfect is that what you're saying? No it gets more kind of rather than quite light and gentle like you know not quite uplifting but more like light and gentle it becomes more rich and deeper in my experience. But it still feels like perfect contentment. Yeah yeah. Well that's fine. Yeah the contentment thing is only a it's not it's not the primary thing it's just kind of me pointing out a bandwidth that if you really want to get into all this stuff and develop the kind of sensitivity to all these different levels then it's a good thing to know and it's a good thing to hang out with. Might it take different kind of flavors and colors at different times? Yeah but the primary thing is the contentment and it really feels like it's you know really really satisfying I mean extremely satisfying. Then you're still in the contentment. Yeah so does that? Okay good. I want to just say a couple more little things. Again just the real encouragement to to marinate. So especially if if different things are opening it can be very tempting to want to just slide around everywhere and check out oh what's this what's that? But as we've been emphasizing right from the beginning the the the fruits of this particular you know set of practice what we call Jhana practice will come from marinating which means many many times over and over just putting yourself submerging yourself and and holding sustaining something for as long as you can you know hour two hours longer three whatever four just sit in something over and over and over. That's going to be doing something to mind heart and body that would just won't get the chance to happen if if we're sliding around too much. So if you've done a lot of soul making and imaginal practice you know oftentimes one doesn't actually one of the amazing things about the soul making practice is just a couple of minutes sometimes with an image can be incredibly potent. It's also true that a couple of minutes with a Jhana can be incredibly potent but it's much more the case that if we really marinate for much longer in a Jhana it's going to do something that it won't do in just a couple of minutes. So it's actually quite rare for a soul making practitioner or an imaginal practitioner to really just spend hours and hours and hours revisiting the same same image and just really really being with that that's at least I haven't kind of put that out as an offering I haven't heard anyone really do that it's not really what we're doing so much with imaginal practices. And there's a difference here you know I'm just going to say this very briefly because I know some of you don't know this territory at all about soul making Dharma so just say this very briefly for those of you do in case you are a soul maker and you find yourself actually taking the same kind of rhythms into Jhana practice which is just moving quite quickly and all these lovely amazing things opening up. When we're with an image when we're with an erotic imaginal image when there's Eros for an image I don't mean by that sexual Eros necessarily it could mean that but more than that. We're doing something different we're resonating and being with it but we want to maintain the tunas remember this from soul making teachings why because Eros needs tunas Eros needs the polarity and the imaginal needs the Eros without the Eros the imaginal folds and without the tunas the Eros folds and therefore the imaginal folds. In Jhana practice actually what we're doing is as much as we can that's the A of sassy can I dissolve into this can I kind of dissolve my body into the peacefulness or whatever is or so it's almost like in imaginal practice the duality is maintained and it self doesn't dissolve into its object there's not that in even intentional direction we maintain this polarity this erotic tension between self and imaginal object lovely as that is but we're not letting it collapse into oneness. In Jhana practice the movement is actually to let it dissolve in imaginal practice the self also might start to become imaginal here's this wonderful imaginal object and the self also starts to become imaginal in Jhana practice the self should become less and less of a sense of self back to the spectrum of self it's actually less and less of a self it's more and more dissolved so these are really really important differences the movement is towards less we could say less polarity less duality in Jhana practice whereas in imaginal practice you're actually sustained not always but for the most part you want to sustain some sense of duality and polarity sometimes you can let yourself go dissolve that way a little bit merge union and all that but if you if you do too much of that will just dissolve dissolve the whole thing. Do we ever reach a state of not complete non duality in Jhana practice? No, no matter what it might feel like etc. Again here's one of those spectra it's a spectrum of less and less separation not necessarily as you go more and more through you know from one to eight but your experience of say Jhana number four at different times might be more or less you know separate dualistic etc. It never becomes in my because duality is also a word that I consider a spectrum so it's very easy there was a completely non dualistic experience and self was gone and blah blah it's probably not in fact it's definitely not if there's a Jhana in my way of understanding this is still some duality but still because of the A is an open ended in sassy the movement is towards less duality. Does this make sense for the soul maker? So there's a difference there so just check if you're getting around too much and that's a different modality that's a different rhythm and in the Jhana it's really towards dissolving dissolving towards dissolving you will never completely dissolve you will never however absorbed you are however great the A is of sassy there can be more yeah so just to delineate between those two yeah actually okay just give me a second here because I need to say a couple of things okay yeah let's try. I do have I feel like I have a strong erotic relationship to the Jhanas and I've had since PT began to arise so the way I experience absorption in the Jhana is kind of yeah it's a temporary absorption but they also have like this long-term relationship with the Jhana which is soulful and erotic in the sense and it's very central in my experience of them so what do you think it's? Yeah so I mentioned this very briefly one time there's so much information but I say again so if I understand what you're saying Karen so when in I don't want to again it's not soul making retreat but just very briefly so in soul making down we talk about Eros and there is this we define Eros as this wanting or movement towards more intimacy more closeness more touching more penetration more opening etc with whatever it is and that could be a Jhana it could be an imaginal person or whatever but that definition is if you like the seed definition the larger definition of Eros means that it is okay it does that there's that movement but in doing that it ignites and stimulates the whole soul making dynamic which involves psyche and logos as well and when psyche and logos get expanded the object becomes bigger and richer and more multifaceted and more complex has more beyonds so that and then the self becomes image as well so outside of meditation outside of Jhana meditation one might have and ideally to get the engines really going and the whole relationship with it one does have an erotic relationship there is Eros in relation to the Jhana in the bigger sense in the wider sense there's a whole image there's a self image me on the path me in the history me in the teacher me in the Jhana is that territory their mystical sense but that's outside of meditation in the meditation it's it's Eros in the smaller sense that we're we're just we're not letting it go to psyche and logos because that's it's a kind of proliferation and we want it's you know simple it's this thing and I'm just dissolving into it we don't let the self become image we don't let the thing become more complex in a way we we actually want it want to get more into it like that so it's a different there's Eros but it's a small it's the small version the seed definition okay we can talk about another time but that's that's I think yeah quite an important distinction there's just a couple of other things if it's okay because then we need to end yes again a context thing so right now we've been talking about soul making practice and then we were talking about desire and we were talking about equanimity and yesterday or whenever we were talking about emotions and and then sometimes you often have maybe less so these days but you often hear something like oh jhana's are dangerous because um you know what you're what you're doing then is suppressing some emotion you could be bypassing you could be engaging in spiritual bypassing or just suppressing emotions that are traumas that are really important etc um I think probably as you do more and more uh jhana practice you'll realize more and more actually that there isn't really suppression going on or the whole idea of it it will become obvious that this is at least the way we're practicing it this is not this is not what's happening here um but it the wider point I wanted to make was there's no there's no single practice that's a complete and perfect practice so we really have to have this sense of a larger context when we're doing jhana practice yeah we do have a certain leaning or preference in relation to as I said right on the opening talk how I'm going to relate to difficult emotions when they arise but then I have a second order a second prept here preference and a third and a fourth you know but there's a certain leaning that way when we do other practices we'll reverse that order or whatever is there a danger of spiritual bypassing yeah there is a danger of spiritual bypassing um um does everyone know that word like avoiding some issue by uh well by avoiding it by hanging out in the nice space in this case um but we can spiritual bypass through any practice uh in fact and um there are other dangers so what I'm trying to say is no single practice avoids all the dangers or is without pitfalls so so if I just relate to if I never relate to emotions in in the way that we're exploring on this retreat for instance this thing might it be a hindrance at its root and what happens if I don't give my attention there and I just let the mind um really develop its loveliness and sometimes let it develop its loveliness and then put put not even suggesting you do this sometimes it arises a difficult memory comes up within that loveliness or or sometimes very occasionally you can put that difficult memory in the loveliness and see what happens and sometimes it's very clear I'm not suppressing anything I'm actually putting it there or it's coming up there's no sense of I'm blocking it or inhibiting my emotional responses and see what happens there's something we can learn about emotions through jhana practice that it's actually much much more difficult to learn through other modalities um other modes of practice so the danger of of not doing jhana practice is that we don't learn those those particular things about emotions are they the complete and final truth about emotions no they're not they're just one one perspective one aspect but to have again this range of both understanding and possibility and the freedom and the skill with emotions that's really really precious so we don't we're just in a certain context here and of course there could be in psychotherapy or working in some other with my emotions and then at some point someone points out oh might you be um is there a word for it that socio politically ecologically bypassing um well a little bit akin to what victor said there's every possibility of that as well and there have been critiques of you know all kinds of spiritual practices and psychological practices that oh i'm getting so into this thing and believing in the reality of this uh that i've neglected this so we're all there's no one practice that's going to do that's going to take care of everything so it really is important what's the bigger picture what's the content how am i seeing this in a bigger mandala of collections of practices that will do their best to kind of uh cover the whole terrain of what it is to be a human being and see things from different angles and perspectives and work with things in different ways that's really really important yeah uh that was one thing and then just finally before we end um usually how how long have we been here i know it probably feels like decades for some people but how long it's like like what's it 13 days okay is that scratched on some people's so usually probably about the third evening or maybe the fourth evening of a week retreat insight retreat i i would probably say something as as i ring the bell for the final sitting i probably say something like so check in how you're feeling right now um you know it it's the end of the daily schedule but maybe there's actually energy there and you're just going to bed out of habit or maybe you feel uh a bit tired but actually um it's actually if i look into it it's actually a version that's making me tired and maybe i want to sit up and and and explore that a little bit but there would be the encouragement to just see what's possible in terms of extending the effort on a macro level um so it's 13 days now apparently and and saying it now but um don't know where you are with you're probably all in different place but now i'll say it to everyone i the in the again it's one of those things that i should have said at the beginning i kind of thought that it was obvious just the way the schedule looked um but in a way the schedule does not end at 9 30 um it's just that there's a group sitting that we like everyone to be here for between 9 and 9 30 but but the hall is open um and especially as retreats get longer people get all kinds of different rhythms and and a lot more energy available sometimes one just uh gets up or goes to bed at the same time out of just check how much is it habit sometimes it's fear i'm afraid that i'll be tired tomorrow or wherever it is um and sometimes it's again aversion this this um you know tiredness can come from aversion it's not actually that i need to sleep it's actually that i just are just pushing things away very subtly and the mind closes in and that makes me just want to go to bed and going to bed is a kind of let's push things away um and similarly the you know the day doesn't begin at 6 45 the meditative day i mean it can if that's if that's your rhythm you know if that's feels that's but again this this invitation to listen in and feel what feels possible and what feels um right and what what you're actually what your energy capacities are and if you're not sure let's play with it a little bit so it's not you know some retreats you might hear it's kind of gone out of fashion but some retreats it's like less sleep less sleep less sleep less sleep you know as the days goes on i don't think that's wise but there is something about listening and finding out and if i don't know experimenting you know really experimenting um lunch time breakfast time depends when your work period is but basically it's all all the places are open to practice um during the morning work period in the lunch after lunch etc um we've been talking a lot about effort levels and there's the micro level you know this kind of okay can i really just just lean back a little bit metaphorically perhaps into more of the receiving moment to moment can i make the attention a bit more intense right now in this that's really important there's also the macro level which we mentioned as well um and that has to do with the rhythm of the day and so the day can very much breathe but but you also want to be listening we want to be listening and responsive and stretching things and experimenting and sometimes we feel like okay i know i'm an over striver and therefore i should you know not stay up late or not get up early or whatever it is or not sit so much but and then on this retreat we've been putting a lot of emphasis on how important that opening a heart is and nourishing a heart but opening the heart is not mutually incompatible with spending more time in formal meditation or extending or playing with one's effort they're not like if you do one the other isn't happening um so the time the time is precious i mean i did say don't and i really mean it don't put too much pressure on these three weeks but at the same time hopefully you have a sense of this the time is precious we're already 13 days and uh time time flies and things change and opportunities um you know some opportunities won't come again um so it's more about rather than should it's more about you know again questions of sensitivity attunement responsiveness experimentation with the whole how much am i sitting how much am i playing my edges what is my habitual kind of habit patterns or what creeps in around things like how much to practice formally when to go to bed when to get up etc how much is habit how much is um a little bit of fear how much is even a little bit of aversion but rather than any should or any formula everyone should sleep x hours or anything like that it's really this invitation to um extend the sensitivity attunement reset responsiveness and experimentation extend it to that domain as well and play play uh and see without any sense of should but we have to experiment to find certain things out and see what's possible so what did you say that yeah okay very good let's have a bit of quiet to go so so so so so time for tea and anything else no okay so time for tea so please consider supporting dharmaseed with a year-end gift your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all visit dharmaseed.org donate to learn more and thanks

 Okie doke. So, I think we'll have some questions today if there are any. If not, I've got some that people have left in notes and also just a few little things that I wanted to put out there. Any announcements? Ok, so please, anybody. Is it Lawrence? Yeah. Ok, that's not really happening so I'll just go ahead. I was going to say. Ok, so my question is around emotion and Jhana. Yeah, so, emotion is going to come up in practice and in a retreat and the first day's instruction to put down the difficult and to tune into the joy and the beauty and the appreciation at a certain point where it feels like they're not mutually exclusive. So, noticing sadness coming up and noticing the beauty of the sadness, for example. So, in the body rather than necessarily getting into a story and a selfie around some sadness, actually noticing the warmth in the heart around sadness and the beauty of it. Noticing the sensations of the eyes watering up and that being seen as deeply beautiful. And a couple of times noticing how actually those sensations can become peaty. It's like, oh this is interesting, this could actually become a springboard into Jhana from the sense of appreciation of the emotional spectrum. So, and also noticing actually that the quiet of the mind becomes and the more the sense of the body and the mind become collected, that when there is, there is thoughts around the emotions that actually there's a much deeper sense of personal insight around what can be revealed from those emotions and how to work with them in the life and or in the imagination or on the cushion. So, I want to ask you in relation to this, similar things with anger, having flavours of less ill will and papancia and becoming more a sense of power, personal power and conflict resolution. That sense in the body of actually this could be really quite a skillful place to be in. So, I wanted to ask you specifically in terms of this retreat, what would be your guidance on working with emotions when they come up, whether to hang out with them, listen to them, explore them, cultivate them in a quasi Jhanic state or whether to notice them, steer into the joy and lessen the fabrication of the emotion. Thank you. Let's see if I get all that. So, yeah, context, context, context. So, there's the context of this retreat and that retreat, this retreat or each person's version of this retreat is in the context of each person's life of practice, larger practice and each person's life. Okay. So, if for example, so this thing about anger, actually being able to transform it, kind of filter out the poisonous elements and transform it into something that's just power, not power over, but just power, you know, the ability not to shrink, not to go crazy, not to spit poison everywhere, but just to be powerful and upright and do what needs to be done. That's a really skillful thing. It's not the primary objective and intention of this retreat. It may be that in practicing Jhanas, as you say, well, there's just more clarity, there's more sensitivity, there's more energy body awareness because of the way we're practicing the Jhanas. Okay. Or primarily, because I'm emphasizing a lot about sensitivity and achievement and all that. It could be that the possibility to make those kinds of transformations, or I want to ask you about the other one, the other example you gave, the possibility of making those kinds of transformations is actually increased on this retreat and you actually, a person sees maybe for the first times, these kinds of possibilities. So that's great. And it's something to note. And on the course of this retreat, it still takes very much second place. So that when there's a choice, it's go towards the joy, go towards the PT, et cetera. In the context of one's life, I will always say both and we want everything and we want to not be afraid of doing this because when I'm doing this, I'm not doing that or doing that because then I'm doing this, not be afraid of the territory there, be able to do both, have accessible to both and really just left with what would be skillful right now. The kind of overriding determinative factor of this retreat is that if we want to do Jhanas, like I said, right from the beginning, the intention has to stay really steady. Otherwise, very easily it gets into all these other expressions, wonderful as they are and really important as they are in the larger context. But for Jhana retreat, and this goes for a solitary Jhana retreat or whatever it is, the intention needs to stay steady. So I don't think I said put down the difficult in the opening so much as, you know, again, this thing about context and let it take second place and what are we trying to do? And can I see the context and see this retreat in that larger context, that larger freedom and range of possibility, which I want and recognize, okay, but just for now, I'm going to do this. So you could, for example, just bookmark those two possibilities that you mentioned. And well, they're slightly different. So let's say the second one, the transformation of anger into come back to the first one, so it was a little unclear about it. You could bookmark that. And so I'm going to practice that later. You know, I mean, that would be the absolutely strict way of doing it. But you know, of course, you can have a little wiggle room at the sides of things. It's just if that if that gets too much, the whole kind of current of intention starts to fray. We really have to take care of the intention to cohere it. But you really, it sounds like it would be a really good idea for you to explore that thing with anger and transform it most, you know, it's really, really good thing to be able to do. Most people are just kind of victims of their own anger when it comes up, don't have the skill to transform it in that kind of way. So to be able to do that is great. It might be that it feels a little bit easier when you're actually on even retreat, you're kind of half on retreat. So, so that's encouraging. Remember, you and I talked about the gray area being important off retreat, not on retreat, but this kind of the gray air to be able to kind of be clear what am I doing in practice to pick up things in practice to notice things. So this is really encouraging. It's not saying I need to be on retreat fully to notice these kinds of things and be able to transform. It's telling you something about the gray area of being, you know, is there really a due so much duality between being on retreat and not retreat? What I really meant by gray area is get to see it all as gray. Really, even on retreat, I'm not really on retreat. I'm just living in a kind of sort of hotel in Devon where they where there's nothing much to do but meditate. It's actually can be really a much more skillful way of thinking about it because retreat and it's all like, oh my god, retreat, okay, get to work and it all becomes so tight. Or retreat is where I behave really, really well and then out there I get into really bad habit. This is really, really, really important. So when you and I had that conversation about the gray, I really meant just see everything as gray. Everything is just a different shade of gray or different shade of purple, whatever you like, you know. So that's really important. But yeah, primarily, we bookmark it for later. If you yeah, the fact that you're noticing it, the fact that it feels possible, that's great. It may be just as noticeable just as possible outside of retreat. And I hope and I hope it is or just fractionally less. But that fraction less is not, you know, you just need to okay, it's it's if you want to learn that you can learn it. And it's really priceless. This this transformation of anger that way. Yeah. Also the larger view about purple. In terms of the first thing, the first example you gave, you use the word sadness. And I'm just wondering whether it was more just that, you know, sometimes the heart is just in a state of being touched and tears come. And strictly speaking, it's not sadness. I'm not sad that X or Y happened or that I've lost A or B or whatever. So this is actually quite important, a distinction to make. There's as we as we develop as human beings, but certainly as we develop as meditators, we should be moving more and more into that territory where the heart is very easily touched and tears are not strangers and but not tears where we just kind of sinking and collapsing. We just end up being a puddle with no power or no clarity or anything. So that kind of heart opening or capacity to be touched is a really, really important, I think, element or strand of the path by all kinds of things, beauty, nature, companionship, all kinds of things. Sometimes the touching feels with a smile and joy and sometimes the touching feels with tears, but it doesn't actually equate to sadness. So just from what you said, I wonder what you would, what distinction you would make now between those two. Looking back on it actually, I was maybe a little quick to use the word sadness. Actually, the example that I'm thinking of is quite a few days ago. It was more actually a beauty that was so touching it brought sadness. Were you brought sadness or brought tears? Sorry, exactly, did it twice now. Yeah, brought tears. And looking at it now, I was exploring some of that kind of secondary intention of being with the emotion rather than the primary intention of the jhana practice. There was a kind of a sense of a capacity to be with it a lot more in times where tears would really come practicing here and sensing beauty. Here was a sense of, I wonder, what's the capacity, what's the stamina for perceiving beauty? Can I play with that a little to the point of where do tears come if I extend that range? So yeah, I guess it was just things to note and also to then notice what's going on in the body and can that be perceived as pleasurable? Oh, look, PT. Yeah, great. So that's all really wonderful. Let me just pick out a few things. So this distinction that I've been trying to make between sadness and being touched or touchable or moved. To me, that's a really important distinction. I encounter it a lot in yogis. It hasn't actually occurred. So there's tears or something or there's a quivering in the heart. I must be sad or I must be upset and not necessary. So that's actually a really important distinction. When we talk about emotions generally, I would say, and I have said that I don't think we're ever going to exhaust what there is to explore about emotion. As human beings. So you just rattle or I could do this. Where's the boundary? How much can I tolerate? What if I see it this way? Can it turn into this? These are just one, two, three right there. And there's so much more in terms of experience, but also in terms of just how we're conceiving emotions. So to me, the exploration of emotion along with several other explorations of a human being or areas or aspects of our existence is endless. Endlessly fertile, endlessly rich. The fact that you're moving into different intentions is not right or wrong, but there is something as I said really important about being really clear and staying with a central intention if you want to do Jhana practice, if you want that to develop. But that's great. That's really great. Yeah, well done. And yeah, so definitely that being touched because it relates to or being touchable because it relates to it's a kind of open heartedness or openness of being, which I said actually that's more primary than anything else in the arising of PT. More primary than sticking your mind, nailing your mind to the breath or whatever it is so you can understand how that how that fits together. And then to be able to kind of ride that and help it go to be that's wonderful. All of that. There was another question woven in there. I've forgotten what it was. Yeah, I think it was around whether or not emotion can be this be another springboard to Jhana. And I think you've kind of opened. Yeah, no, we said that. I think there was another one hidden in the middle, but it doesn't matter. We can we can do it another time. Yeah. Okay, great. Very good. Yeah. So my question is around the word radical, which you use a lot. You've been using more over the years, and you've used it in this you've used it in other contexts in relationship to ethics insight. And you've also used it now in relationship to like, Jhana practice and what does that mean to why that's so important? I mean, you know, I think about the middle way. It's like, well, doesn't fit in a way. Of course, the Buddha was radical in many ways, but I wonder if you could just elaborate a bit more. Why is that so important? Why is that become seemingly become more important over the years now that you're teaching? So I feel like the word radical gets used in at least three ways in English. One is kind of just crazily extreme, you know, like a radical fundamentalist terrorist or something like that. One is just as a kind of one is as a kind of euphemism for something unusual. It's radical. Wow, what a radical idea. It's unusual. But the third and there are others, but the third way is the way I usually mean it more and radical. The word in English comes from radix in Latin, which means root. So to go to go to the root of something. So to me, you say radical emptiness, for example, as an example, I might use would be an understanding of emptiness that goes to the root of absolutely everything. Because you can't even go go beyond it. So if I just if my understanding of emptiness or just just pertains to selves, for example, the self is empty. What there really is is aggregates, for example, then to me, that's not a radical or one could have a more radical teaching because the aggregates themselves might be empty. And then the time in which the aggregates exist is also empty, etc, etc. So I tend to use it that way when I used it the other way. I think I was talking about radical radical practicing exchanging self and other radically. I think, yeah, maybe there I again really meant to kind of it was a mixture in terms of what I meant to radically as sort of something like more extremely than you might think of. You know, so we can do we can do a lot of practices a little bit sort of just dipping our toes in a little bit or a little bit half heartedly. What would it be to really I'm seeing here with this pain and this and whatever is I say I'm dying of cancer. You know, it's like what would it be to practice exchanging self and other with all that all that. And I really mean it. I came to this meditation retreat and I wanted it to go well and it doesn't feel like it's going well and just to completely completely is there a synonym for radically just turn it round really what in this moment I give up my my desire for that because I'm taking on this frustration, this misery, this this failure, this hindrances, this not going well in in the in the hope that there's some kind of reciprocal gift for someone else that I may never even meet. So in that sense, it's like and to really do that and do that full heartedly with the totality of one's being and then one kind of if you know that practice, you can do it. You know, you can get you can get down to things like my, you know, my very body, my atoms, my mind, this, this, this thought, that thought, you know, so there's a radicality in terms of complete completeness to the to the fundamentally to the other one's being. So I tend to use it that way. And sometimes it's a bit more just like a sloppy word for more than you might usually think sort of thing. Do I use it more of these? Maybe I don't know. It's a commonly used word now in the Dharma. So maybe I'm just kind of upping the ante a little bit on on what it what I mean by it. I'm not sure. But maybe I'm not sure what you're asking. Are you just wondering about my teaching? Are you wondering about that word or what? Why are you asking? I think the answer is the question. Okay. It's just those two meanings. And I have another question about so you spoken about like the levels of mastery, you know, which would indicate or at least subsume that in the next Jan is sort of on its way, if not there already. On the other end, I'm wondering, you know, what would be some of the conditions or factors or indicators whereby, you know, we'd be spending too much time in a particular Jhana. Yeah. Maybe, maybe one might have, you know, very strong experiences of the next Jhana that just happens over and over again. And. And that might indicate, you know, it's not just, for example, in the second, it's not just happiness once in a while and a little bit, it just keeps going into the second. It's a very clear, very vivid experience where you can kind of tick a lot of boxes. And maybe it might, if I've already said I've already got a lot of the elements of mastery of the first Jhana and I can already sit in there a lot, you know, for hours and etc. And am I learning anything new at that point in the first about the first Jhana or is it. So that's another question. Am I learning anything new here? Of course, I may not be learning anything new because I'm not paying attention enough and I'm not playing enough, but I may not be learning anything new because I actually I've actually know that territory. So that would be another another criteria. OK. OK. Good. Shall I throw out a few things I was wanting to say? Some of them are quite little. Oh, I made a couple of mistakes in. I think yesterday's talk, the first is really not that significant, but just in case someone gets wondering and gives them the wrong sense. So in that simile about the desert, the wanderer through the desert, right? And I said the desert represents Samsara. Actually, that can't be right because that would imply that the Jhana is on Yavana. Well, maybe I don't know because maybe it's an oasis in a desert anyway. Maybe the desert represents the life run by the hindrances. I don't know. Maybe it represents Samsara and the oasis is not the end of the desert. It's just a little and you've still got to go further. Maybe so either one. But it doesn't really matter. Second mistake, slightly more significant or I don't know if it's a mistake or it just wasn't clear enough. I said something like experiences of deep equanimity or fairly deep equanimity that come from insight meditation are often not actually the third or fourth Jhana, where there's the equanimity kind of coming in such a strong and beautiful way. However, experiences like some of you know, the practice, the kind of group of practices that I call the vastness of awareness actually is, as you get into that, there is a real mystical sense of wonder. It is very beautiful. There is a sense of sacredness there. It does really touch you, etc. And it is an experience of deep equanimity. However, that kind of those kinds of opening, what I call the practice of vastness of awareness, has a range of depth to it. And so it's something that one can open up just a little bit and may not yet have that kind of almost divinity to it and sacredness to it and sense of almost the ultimate. So, for example, like one level of depth is just all phenomena seem to emerge out of that vastness and disappear back in it. It's like the womb or the source of everything. And that very seeing really, it's a bit like when we talked about the nada sound, how can you use it in an insight way? It's just a backdrop. Everything comes out of that, fades back into it. That level of seeing is very, very fruitful for the equanimity, etc. And it begins to have a kind of mystical flavor to the whole thing and divine flavor to the whole thing. As you practice more with the vastness of awareness, it goes even deeper. There's a sense where everything has one substance and that substance is awareness. Everything is awareness. So these are now now we're really moving into a mystical sense of things and that will have a lot of beauty. So when I said people just done insight or just open to equanimity through insight practice, I didn't really mean that because if by insight practice you just mean I'm just watching, just watching, just being mindful, just being mindful and kind of letting go with that general encouragement to just watch and let go. That won't take you to these deep ends of vastness of awareness. You actually have to kind of direct it, do something more deliberate and actually change the practice slightly so that it goes there. So someone just reported they got a bit confused by that, so maybe I hope that helps. In other words, we make the vastness of awareness a practice in itself that's slightly different than regular insight practice. We'd have to change a few things in order for it to really go to these really lovely deeper levels. And then a cup of two or three people are struggling with or have been struggling with kind of working backwards, not being able to get the first John and not even being able to get PT or sustain PT, but being able to, for instance, get the happiness or something deeper. And so I want to throw this out in case that's common to anyone or common at any point later for anyone. So a few different things you can try if that's the case. Let's say you can get the happiness and you're getting more and more fine with that. You're learning the happiness, but PT just won't happen. If we think about the John of factors and everything we said so far, we should be able to kind of almost surmise these things ourselves. So PT is, for instance, coarser as PT and Suka are both energy body experiences. So I said at first we think of Suka, the happiness, as a mental experience. But that's just at first. Once a person has had the PT and they want to make the distinction between PT and Suka. Eventually, one sees actually they're both just frequencies of vibration of the energy body. And yes, they have mental components, too. But really, one could see them as just Suka is just a more refined energy body vibration than the PT. So what that means, if I want to work backwards, what it means, what it implies is here I am in the happiness and it's going well and I'm kind of in it and I'm stewing in it, I'm drinking in it. Then can I, listening to the mix of frequencies in the energy body, in the happiness, can I notice the coarser ones, not the more subtle ones, but the coarser ones, and actually tune to them and find the enjoyment to them. Because what I attune to is what gets amplified, right? We said that much earlier. So that might be a way of working backwards. It might also be that, oftentimes, probably most people, not everyone, most people notice the PT tends to have an upward current to it. It tends to move up the body. And in a way, when I say opening and surrendering, abandoning to the PT, in a way, you're really opening the body to that upward current. And that's what all this head-tilting back business is, if any of you get that a little bit. The body is naturally being opened, or like we said with the question about the feet, it's naturally being opened like that. And it's opening to what, for most people, primarily feels like it's got an upward current and it can be really strong, it can be really, really subtle. It can feel like the PT is actually pretty stable, but within that stability it's got slight waves of upward waves. Here's a side point I've just remembered that might be important to say, and I'll come back to what I'm saying, and enumerate it so we won't get lost. So sometimes people say, well, I thought the PT, I thought you said the PT had to be steady before we work on it, but I feel these waves, like it comes in waves. So then I ask them, okay, think about the sea, think about the ocean. If you think about a wave in the ocean, if you think about a wave near the shore, near the sand or whatever it is there, that wave, or that portion of sand, let's say, has times when it has water over it, a wave breaks over it, and it has times when the water recedes, right, before the next wave comes, and it's bare sand or rock or whatever it is, right? If you go to a wave 100 meters out and the sea is deeper there, then I still see, oh, there's a wave, there's a wave, okay, it doesn't break necessarily out there, but there's a wave, right, there's that undulating motion of the water. But out far to sea there, you're never going to get, unless there's a tsunami or something, you're never going to get bare sand to sea or bare rock, you're never going to see the bottom. In other words, out there, the PT, the water, is actually steady enough, but within that steadiness, in other words, it never disappears. Within that steadiness, there's waves. Do you understand? So it's not that it has to be totally still, it probably, PT by its nature is almost, well, it might be, but it tends to have currents in it. What we don't want, though, in order to be able to work with PT, we want to make sure it's not a wave and then nothing, bare sand, and then a wave and then nothing, bare sand. Does this make sense? Yeah, so that was a side point, but generally PT has these up currents, so if I'm in the second genre, it's going well, or I've learned how to make it go well and I'm enjoying it and I'm digging it, then, then, but I can't get the PT or I can't get the first genre, then what I can do is see if I can just notice any upward currents in the energy body experience, maybe in the happiness or whatever. They might be, at that point, really quite subtle, so again, I have to get my antennae out and just I have to have that, maybe, have to have that delicacy of listening, of receptivity, and within that I start to notice, oh yeah, oh, there are some upward currents. Again, attuning to them, they amplify and maybe that takes me to the PT or amplifies the PT. Does that make sense? Third thing, that's the second option, the third option is just imagine upward currents. Just imagine upward currents. Don't be afraid to use your imagination in these kinds of practices. I imagine them for a little while and lo and behold, the next thing I feel them and then I can enjoy them, get into them and the whole experience changes. Fourth possibility is to, okay, here I am in the happiness, it's going, I still can't get the PT, here I am in the happiness though, I'm enjoying it, I'm getting into it, all that stuff. I've been in there for a while and I just, you know, a while meaning really some minutes and minutes and minutes and, you know, and then I just drop a little magic formula in, a little tincture. Maybe the word PT, maybe the word rapture, maybe the word ecstasy or bliss or whatever your word is and whatever your language is. Again, the mind at these levels with Samadhi becomes so malleable, so sensitive, so receptive that just dropping something like a word in can have a lot of effect and is a really skillful thing to be able to do in lots of different ways in Jhana practice. And the fifth thing to say is generally, probably if that's the problem, I'm getting okay with the sukha and the second Jhana, but really not so okay with the PT and the first Jhana, then you'd want to be hanging out much more in the really bubbly happiness rather than too much time, if that's my goal, to work backwards that way, too much time in the more serene happiness. The bubbly one from our cooking ingredient thing yesterday has more PT in it, right? So there's five things you could try. Okay. Oh, sure. Please, yeah. If you're feeling the PT as water pressure on Sam and the Jhana, you know, get further out of it. If your experience is you're feeling the PT with these breaks that they're saying there, can you nudge it out for me? More often it's a question of just letting it ripen until that is the case, but having said that, like everything is not so black and white, there's a kind of intermediate possibility which is that's naturally where it wants to go. Okay, naturally, oftentimes at first, the first experiences of PT someone has is more like the waves near the shore where you get these kind of just comes and then it comes and not even sure how it's coming or what the hell it is or anything. In time, it wants to go there. We can do things, let's put it in the negative, we can do things to slow that down, that whole maturing process, and we can do things to just kind of ease its passage, put it that way. And the best thing to ease its passage is to make sure when these waves come, I'm somehow neither snatching at them, as the Buddha says, I don't snatch at them, but I'm really making sure I'm open to them. So again, we come back to this. If a wave comes, it's like just, you know, maybe it has a little after echo and then I really want to open to that, you know. So if I'm not fully opening to them, that might be one of the things that actually is just slowing down this maturation process for the Yajana boat to be out there. Yeah, so that's one thing. And then another possibility as well, again, without too much pressure is even if it feels like it goes badly and I'm believing the mind that saying, I can't do this and whatever it was, or I've lost it, or, you know, sometimes it's just worth saying, what the hell, let's just play with imagining my body full of PT, you know, and just a little, you know, few moments of trying that, even though it doesn't, it feels like it's not, you know, going to be a pointless thing to do. So there's always that possibility as well. So you got a kind of range of possibilities and answers there. Yeah. Okay. How are your hindrances doing today? Or actually, how is your Papansha today? How's your Papansha doing? How's your Papansha doing today compared with yesterday? How's the suffering from your Papansha doing compared to two days ago? These are, you know, it's going to be up and down to wherever you are at the moment. It's going to move. It's going to move. And we're so, so interested in that movement over time from this high amplitude up and down business where we're really believing something and everything's grumpy and we hate Guy House and all that stuff with applying the antidotes. But even more importantly, with the wisdom, am I believing, am I just a sucker for this thing? With this kind of questioning of what am I believing here, this high amplitude wave over time, over time, and actually it may take, you know, weeks or whatever, but this is where we want to get to, that this high amplitude wave becomes just a little sort of, you know, placid caterpillar wiggle. It's really just a sort of energetic, you know. And so much rests on the belief. So much rests on what am I believing here. Without care, there's a hindrance. I believe the coloring of perception and the thoughts that the hindrance stimulate. The coloring of perception and thoughts are believed and then it becomes for puncture and then that just snowballs. So doubt and aversion, for example, I was talking to someone yesterday, even subtle doubt and even more powerfully subtle aversion will color the memory of, for example, yesterday's wonderfulness or the joy that you experienced two days ago or three days ago. Aversion is like craving, is a form of aversion, like grasping, is incredibly powerful. It cannot be there without shaping, fabricating and coloring whatever phenomenon is in consciousness at the same time. Whatever phenomenon, that's a memory, a sight, a sound, smell, taste, touch, blah blah blah blah, the sense of self, whatever. Any degree of aversion is going to color that. So yesterday it was just, whenever it was, three days ago it was wonderful and now there's a little bit of aversion in the mind and I look back and wasn't that good or whatever it is. This is what I mean by developing some insight and wisdom in relation to the hindrances and papansha and what the Buddha calls the defilements, the chelesas, greed, hatred, delusion. Greed aversion, I think, is a much better word. Even, and the same thing with the rest of the hindrances, subtle doubt, etc. I remember having, I can't remember what stage it was, probably, it sounds like it was getting into the first genre and really doing that over and over. And at some point doubt comes and it wasn't even a really strong, as soon as that. And I was sitting cross-legged a lot and I thought, I'm probably just sitting on a nerve. I was sitting with my heel in my perineum, it probably can't be PT, it's just some, I don't know, I'm pressing on my perineal, is there a perineal nerve? There's probably a group of, whatever. And then the mind starts, just these little things, but aversion is a killer. It's a killer. It kills joy. And connecting again to what we were talking about yesterday with dependent arising and the teaching about karma, a little bit of aversion, what kind of world do I live in? What does my self feel like? What does my practice feel like? What's my view of things? What's my sense of where I am, who I am? So for me, the second hindrance, I don't know, I can't remember, I should look it up maybe later, but, so they're usually in the order, sense desire, ill will, sloth and torpor, restlessness, doubt. The second one from ill will means I wish someone harm. Okay, so to me that's a really extreme form of the hindrance. The killer, at this point for you, I hope, the killer will be aversion in a much more subtle way, it's not even towards anyone, you might get towards yourself, but it's aversion. Aversion will be the killer and aversion can be to any phenomenon whatsoever, any phenomenon, any sight, sound, smell, taste, touch, thought, memory, any phenomenon of experience, a situation, sensations, a state itself, we have aversion to a state. So this ends up being really like, oh, watch that seed, watch that seed, because it's extremely powerful and it will either, you know, that seed, like I said, will sprout and grow and it will be a whole damn forest if I'm not careful, or even in very subtle seed form, it already is sending out its toxins, coloring the perception. And even if there's not a lot of thinking, we start believing what we're seeing, smelling, tasting, touching, and we start believing what we're sensing, colored through the lens of aversion. So there's something, again, so much of the gift of this practice is in relationship to hindrances and getting wise in relationship to hindrances. But this is a long-term lesson, it's a long term, it's not something we get like that necessarily. Okay, a couple more little things. Just I think, I don't know if everyone needs this, but do we need to very briefly review Sassy, not to get hung up on the wrong things? Okay, is Lawrence, was one of you saying something? Oh, okay, so Sassy, first S, suffused, I do want it to move towards suffusion, the whole body saturated and suffused, pervaded and permeated, steeped and drenched, and the whole body involved. I do, once I've got that, I tick it and I don't have to bother about it again, okay? It's done. For that sitting, it's done, okay? So there is a goal there and I try and move towards that goal, occasionally, depending on where you are in your evolution of practice, it won't spread everywhere. I've tried all my little tricks, it won't spread, don't worry about it. Eventually it will spread, but there is a goal and then I'm done with that job. Whereas, for example, the A and the two middle S's, S, are, actually you spell it differently in the US, but anyway, S, it's a little kind of donkey. Where was I? These are infinite. I will never come to a point where there's no more possibility. There will never be a moment in any meditation I ever do in my life where I cannot improve whatever degree of absorption I've had, where I cannot, whether the object cannot sustain either longer in time, the PT or the circuit, longer in time or with less nano-micro-pico interruptions. And the same goes with the mind, that the mind can't sustain either longer in time or with less kind of nano-micro-pico interruptions. So they're infinite. Now what does that mean about how I relate to them if they're infinite? It does something to the goal-oriented mind and the judgmental and the measuring mind. Wherever I am, the direction is that way. And if I feel like, wow, I'm so far gone that way, I've never gone this far before, this is amazing, great, that's wonderful, and the direction is still that way. And if it's not going so well, the direction is still that way. There's nothing to judge here. These things will vary from time to time. I'm gradually working at my skill, but because they're infinite, it releases me from any kind of success failure notion. Do you understand? This is really, really important. Don't get hung up on the wrong things. So this is why I give the sassy part, what do I do now, but also what's important and what is not so important. What do I need to complete, like the suffusion, and what do I just need to, it just tells me what direction to go in. When we come to the eye, the intensity of, let's say, the PT or whatever it is, it doesn't matter. As long as it's strong enough, and it's definitely, meaning it's pleasant, it's obviously pleasant, it doesn't matter. I'm not trying to make it more intense, it will get more intense or less intense, it's irrelevant. That completely lets me off the hook of having to worry about it. However much I'm enjoying the E, I can enjoy more. So in a way that's infinite, in a way. But part of the art of enjoying is going to be not to pressure myself to do that, but it's a direction. These are important in terms of our, I don't know, micro-psychological well-being, which if we're not careful can actually, unfortunately, like a poisonous fungus, blossom into our macro-psychological well-being, because we've got hung up on the wrong things and we just keep judging ourselves for what's actually not the right thing to judge ourselves by. Does that make sense? So, a little bit related. This business where it keeps a marinade and mastery, marination and mastery, and how for me those are really important orientations and aspirations for the way we're practicing and the way I would like to communicate all this. But mastery includes trying to sustain it longer, to sit longer, let's say with the PT so I can sit an hour or more, etc., whatever it is, whichever jhana. And marinating with the elements of sassy and playing with that. And all this business, marinating and mastery and mastery, also includes sometimes, you know, it's not going so well today. Okay, now I'm going to kind of emphasize in this sitting, or for the next 20 minutes, I'm just going to emphasize my steadiness of focus in a way, partly what I've been a little bit trying to de-emphasize. There are times when it's like, okay, that's what I'm going to do. Maybe I can do that with the PT, which is quite a refined object, and I feel like I need to understand, I'm learning to pay attention to a more refined object. It's actually hard. Most people would not be able to do that. So I need to train myself to be able to stay with a more refined object. And that's the micro view, the kind of subtle view that I have of what I'm doing and what my emphasis is in the next 20 minutes sometimes. And other times it's like, yeah, I'm working on the, you know, I'm working on the 8th jhana generally, but actually I'm just, right now, what I need to do is go back to my base practice and work on my focus and steadiness there. All that's normal and available for someone who's just got the view of mastery as what I'm doing. It doesn't mean that I'm, in other words, it's wide and there's a range and we're responsive to shifting the emphasis at different times. It includes quite a lot. Does that make sense? Yeah. So flexibility, responsibility, responsivity and inclusiveness. And in relation to mastery, someone wrote a question which I have here. So let me read the question and then maybe say also a couple of things. We say that the arising of jhana depends on causes and conditions. We also say that mastery of jhana includes being able to enter it at will, which could perhaps be understood as implying a certain independence of at least some causes and conditions. So there's an apparent contradiction there. Could you please elaborate on how to relate to the two statements and how to skillfully relate to the notion of entering at will? Yeah, very good. This is exactly one of those things when I said I will contradict myself, but also more importantly than that, it's an instance of things where, again, we want a range of views and we don't want to get locked into this view or that view. I would say for anyone at all, I mean, I can say give them the right medical drugs and their ability to enter a jhana at will will be severely compromised, I would say. If you've had enough general anaesthetics or something. So anyone is going to have some limits on their entry at will. It's never going to be 100% of the time. Never. You can have illness, be low energy, you could be tired, you could be, you know, a million different things. Digestion, upset, a lot of different things that will at times mean that even someone who's, you know, a master, etc., will not on those occasions be able to enter at will. So that, so, but still it's good to aspire to. So it's, you know, in a way it relates to the whole teachings about self and emptiness of self. In a way to see it as a jhana depends on causes and conditions is a way to conceive of jhana just without self, without the self coming in and getting all tight about, can I do this, can I not, am I failing, am I not? How, how, you know, what badge do I get, have I achieved, etc. It's just causes and conditions. I think, and yet there is the development from the point of view of the emptiness of self, seeing in terms of causes and conditions is seeing in terms of the, not in terms of self, yeah. But we can also, and we need to in life and in the Dharma, see in terms of self. I do this, I choose this ethically, I make this choice, I cultivate this, I cultivate meta, etc., I choose to cultivate meta, all that. It's, it's normal and healthy and skillful kind of view or conception of what's happening. Mastery won't, in other words, setting it up as a goal actually gives, again, gives us a direction. If I never mentioned it, then people might be just sliding around all over the place and not, not getting as much fruit out of the whole practice because they're not trying for, it wouldn't occur to them to try for certain things that just go under this umbrella of mastery. Do you understand? You wouldn't, you wouldn't occur to you to try this or that. But if you say, oh, there's a thing called mastery and see if you can do it, and it depends on intention. So you can say intention is one of the causes and conditions. Is intention ever, going back to what I said earlier, is intention ever a completely sufficient cause and condition? You know, it's necessary but not sufficient. Intention by itself, give me enough drugs, give me enough this or that, starve me, you know, whatever, too tired, etc. Intention itself is not sufficient. You understand? But I need to mention it because it actually is a very powerful ingredient of the causes and conditions, but it's never sufficient. But the larger point here has to do with teachings about emptiness. And to, again, I want the range of views. I want, I want to be able to drop, here's a situation, here's something I have to do, here's something that happened to me, here's something that I did wrong, here's something that I succeeded at, here's something I'm doing great, here's something that people are praising me for, here's something that people are blaming me for. At times I want to have available to me a way of viewing all that that deconstructs the self out of it. I see in terms of causes and conditions, and that can be extremely liberating and healing, and take the pressure off the self, the self and measuring the self and blaming the self, at times. But if I get stuck there and I say, well, that must be the right way to view things because that's Buddhist, right? Not self, no self, there is no self and all that, emptiness. I think one's stuck in a partial and incomplete view of emptiness. The empty, again, sorry, the radical emptiness of self means actually that any view of self, even the view of there is no self, is eradicated, ripped up from its root. And what that means is all views become available to us, including the view of self. So someone who's really understood the emptiness of things, the emptiness of self, can move easily between views that kind of look in a way not in terms of self, and views that look in a way in terms of self. So I'm a bit tired today, is this making sense? Yeah, this is really, really, really important, really important. To my way of understanding, if one hasn't seen it, one hasn't really gone deep enough. It also just won't make sense in one's life. Here, this collection of aggregates wants to marry that collection of aggregates. This collection of aggregates would like to have sex with that collection of aggregates. It's like it's not certain things. This collection of aggregates would like to compose this piece of music in praise for the collection of aggregates that is the universe or whatever. It doesn't. If we just look that way, there's going to be enormous areas and dimensions of our being, of our lives, of our souls, of our existence that are not supported. And that's going to be a real problem. It would be a real problem for ourselves. It would be a real problem for our relationships. It would be a real problem for the society and the planet. And so sometimes you get this shadow side of Buddhism that always wants to deconstruct things and see things that way, when actually I do need to be not just comfortably able to comfortably move into a self view, but able to move into a self view that's actually beautiful and soulful and enriching and gives meaning and all of that. And I want both of those. So these two contradictory teachings, mastery and at will and dependent on causes and conditions, yes, contradictory, complementary, but we want them both. And they're helpful at different times. And in a way, they're not completely contradictory. I suppose the truest one is dependent on causes and conditions of which intention is one, but never completely a sufficient one just just by itself. Does that make sense? Is that okay? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. It's a shame you don't have the microphone there. Let me see if I can just. So Marco saying in a way, grateful to the Jhana practice for enabling him to see that that there was a hierarchy of views happening here. And the sort of this is really just causes and conditions was trumping the view that, oh, I can do this with my intention. And so really, really, really important. Yeah. You know, so if we come back to it, so if we come back, how do if all these different views are available, the question is, why do I choose this one over that one at any time? Right. If actually they're all legitimate and I'm given permission, as you say, and I hereby give you permission, it's like, how am I going to choose between these different views? That becomes the criteria. And that's a really interesting question. Now, classical dharma is just was very simple. What reduces the suffering here? Yeah. So we can get attached, like I said, we can get attached to a view of it's really just causes and conditions and and things like that. And there is no self. And there's a kind of attachment there. But if it comes in too soon, too quickly and too pervasively, it it kind of prevents a lot of other really good stuff opening in our life. And the views, other views that might in certain situations deliver much more relevant fruit. Yeah. If someone and like I said, if someone is practicing the jhanas and they're starting to get grandiose, look what I can do. A, as I pointed out, when we talked about that, it's very rare if they're if they're real jhanas and they're going in and out enough, it's it's very rare, I think what's much more rare is the opposite view. I'm failing at something and then this then this view of just it's just something that's coming out of causes and conditions when the cause and conditions are not there. It's not there, you know. So that that view, again, it's helpful for the relieving of that suffering of the contraction of a certain self view, which is judging myself or or think you understand. So I'm using it for that purpose. But there might be times where someone's adopting the other view. I can do this. And actually, it feels like that's actually releasing some suffering or counterbalancing some history of suffering that I can't do something or, you know, could be anything. But in classical Dharma, the framework is, yeah, there's all these views. Which one do I pick up now to look through to perceive this situation in order to to to reduce whatever suffering is there in order to heal whatever suffering is there? That's the criterion for adopting this view or that view. Yeah, so that's really important. We can add to that and enrich and make it more complex, but I'm not going to do that now. But this thing about mastery is also quite interesting because it may well be that this is something to check, I think, in the longer in the larger scheme of things. Each person to check, do I have somewhere maybe consciously, maybe really semi-consciously a kind of philosophy or a kind of psychology or a mixture of the two that, for example, doesn't like the idea of mastery or doesn't like the idea even of the self's autonomy as if I'm just, you know, I much prefer the view of things just happening. And this thing opened up, so I kind of flowed with that. And then conditions were such that this thing opened up and I flowed with that. And it can be a lot of beauty in that, a lot of really lovely flow and a lot of even creativity and all kinds of things. But behind it and usually kind of semi-consciously is a little bit of an entrenchment in a view that doesn't allow a notion of the autonomous self deciding and acting and choosing X or Y and perhaps even gaining mastery. Of course, one can be locked in the other view as well, but this is something, again, in spiritual circles, quite interesting to check out. And again, my opinion is why can't we have both? Why can't we have both and have the whole range and explore what it might be that we don't like that view so much, what's preventing us from seeing the beauty in the view of the self's autonomy and the self's power to choose and the self's decision to do something and work at something and get something or vice versa that's much more rare in spiritual circles. So explore that, what's holding us back, what we don't like about it and actually liberate it so both become available to us. Why not? So these are kind of subtle imprisonments that we can hopefully begin to see as we do more practice, whether it's Jhana practice or whatever. Jhana practice, as I mentioned a couple of times, it kind of ramps up our ability to see all kinds of really subtle locked places or defilements. People generally would have no idea that such a practice would do such a thing. You tend to think, well, insight practice, where I'm just opening, or mindfulness, where I'm just opening and kind of being with whatever comes up and giving everything kind of equal interest, that's where I'm going to notice these things. Actually, there's a lot of hidden things that one cannot notice unless you actually try working in certain ways, for instance, with a goal, with the idea of, let's say, mastery or this or that. And that starts illuminating things, hidden corners, shining lights into hidden corners that we wouldn't otherwise have even realized were there. So to me, there's all kinds of secondary gifts to Jhana practice, which I think each of them are immense, and we don't tend to think that way or realize that at first. Are there any other questions? Yes. Is that Sabre at the back? Oh, yeah, please with the mic. Thank you. Can I just before you start say one more thing about that? So a very common experience as you do more Jhana practice, it will be that the... You almost feel like the mind has a momentum to go, let's say, to the third Jhana. It's intending to go to the first Jhana and it just goes to the third Jhana. As you do more and more, that thing becomes... that kind of thing becomes very common. I could just sit here and wait and the mind will just go somewhere. We've done a lot of Jhana practice or there's that propensity or it could be any Jhana. It just wants to go or I've aimed it there and it goes over there or whatever. This gets more and more common so that a lot of people actually end up practicing. That's how they practice. If they've done a lot of dedicated Jhana practice, they just sit down and see where it goes and there's not much intention at all. It's just let's see where I slide on the ice today. And I used to say it's as if the mind has a mind of its own. It's really got this kind of other intention. So when you've done a lot of Jhana practice, that can be fine because they're all good places. But I would still balance it with can I still retain some... even if it wants to go there, can I still choose to go somewhere else at times? So there's really again, there's this range. Sometimes it might be you need to let it go where it wants for a little bit and then the horse wants to go to the carrot shop for a little bit and then you go to bingo. Whatever. But I think this idea of keeping open the range of freedom, the range of possibilities to me is something really, really important. OK. Anyway, Sabra, please. It's just a question a little bit about what you just pointed to about freeze up locked places. And really seeing that process over the last couple of days, just some like, you know, both psychological but also in the body, like places of deep old subtle holding and tightness kind of like just beginning to move open, you know. And there's so much beauty in that. And also, it feels like it takes time. And I'm curious about how to relate to that because I see how my mind can kind of like keep sticking going back to something I'm calling locked. And really, it's opening. But yeah, just. Yeah, thank you. This to me is a really important question. So let's say two two kinds of locks to oversimplify right now. There's a kind of mental lock, actually three kinds of locks. And there's a locking locking in view, which is usually the hardest to even identify, you know, unless you someone says something or you read something that kind of hold on. And we don't even realize what views were locked in. So there's that kind of locking. I've said a little bit about that. But generally over the years, I've said a lot about that kind of thing. And then there's a locking in a kind of mental territory. So I was, for instance, saying was it yesterday or sometime just saying about the second genre, for instance, hey, don't neglect the really bubbly happiness. Especially if that's a little bit alien to your personality. It's like that's not kind of congruent with your usual shapes yourself takes. We can get locked into certain emotional bandwidths or territories. So person has certain whatever it is. But that would be one example. So those two, the locking in views and the and the mental territory locking, I would say, you know, with the locking in views can there are times when one has to actually be really kind of not aggressive, but vigorous and kind of alert. And actually, really, I'm trying to look, I'm really trying to question things and where I might be locked and open things up that way. So there's a real sense of I'm trying to I'm trying to do this. One will never come to the end of that. But but it's a really the intention can be quite strong and the action can be quite strong. Like, well, I'm going to start reading stuff about this or whatever it is, you know, in the middle territory, this this or the second one called the second one. So I am tired of numbering in my head backwards. Did I call the view the first or the third? OK, so I need to reorder my numbering in my head. The first the first can be quite vigorous times. There'll be times when actually that's that's that's the most important thing in practice is actually the most important thing in one's life is this looking at the views I have of all kinds of things about what the Dharma is about what awakening is about all kinds of things. That one needs to actually be be active and and vigorous in one's in one's questioning and exploration. And that might mean a wide exploration, but the intention and the action can be quite strong. In the second one, what I'm calling kind of a lock into mental territory, let's say this example I gave, it's like, well, I am I'm very used to being quite peaceful. I'm quite peaceful and equanimous, but the real sort of bubbly happiness is kind of alien to me. Then I was in the middle version, there's gentle unlocking, you know, but unlocking happens just by hanging out in that kind of happiness. For example, I don't need to put too much pressure on the whole situation or too much pressure on that pattern on that lock. Yeah, I just I just need to if something is opening that kind of is expanding my heart range, effectively my soul range, then then I want to linger there and let it do its work rather than just say, yeah, taste of that one tick because I've experienced it once and then go back to a kind of equanimity, which is supposedly deeper. So it can kind of go under the mask of a deepening of practice. Yeah, does it make sense? But the third one, the locks in the body, this is, in a way, a little bit more delicate. So, yes, as we practice Jhana and to the degree in any formal session that there is a real kind of absorption and suffusion, etc, that those physical locks tend to dissolve. And that dissolution may last after the session. It may last if it's a habitual. Sorry, if it's a non habitual, it was just locked. I've never had that particular lock before, then it can just go. That was it. It doesn't come back. If it's a habitual lock, something gets unlocked when there's the Jhana or whatever. And that unlocking can last some degree of time afterwards. I would just be careful not to put a pressure on it because it may well come back. There's a kind of body karmic knot there that is just a tendency to create that kind of lock. We can play with this playing of perception and see the knot as PT and see the knot as happiness and all that's going to really help. I would be really, really careful about two things. One is making a project of unlocking the body. And a lot of people get into this. It's really a big deal. I've actually kind of, if I see that as a long term project, that's not Dharma to me. Unlock this or that or this or that may unlock at different times through different practices, through different playing with perception, through different states. And that's wonderful and that's great. But if I make that, if I kind of get a bit obsessed with that, then that's something else. It's not Dharma anymore. I've actually shrunken my view of what Dharma, I'm not saying this is what you're doing, so I'm just giving a general teaching now. I've shrunken my view of what the Dharma could be and into something much smaller and gotten a bit obsessed about something and using something as a kind of measuring stick for how I'm doing. So sometimes with a lot of practice or a little practice, things that have been habitual may go forever. It's just gone. And sometimes they may go for a little while and come back. Sometimes they may go for a long while and come back. But I really have to have my view there quite right. The Dharma offers us much, much, much more than just that kind of unlocking of energy patterns. There's something else I was going to say, but I've forgotten it. Another way of saying all that is just to be very, very light when you're playing with that and kind of hold it and make sure it's held in a much larger context. And even the way you're playing with it, in playing with perception that way or the state, to be really quite light about it. How does that sound? Yeah, so helpful. Okay, good. There was another piece with that. I feel this is really important. Yeah, it was something about just about how to view all that. It's not coming, sorry. If we go back to this thing instead about playing with perception, and you can, you know, with enough, you get into this enough and you can, here's a lock, here's a contraction, here's a pain, whatever it is. And pain in energetic terms is just a contraction of energy. And you can play with perception, see it as PT and it unlocks, etc. But what's most significant about that is, even if it is, if I look at it and it never comes back, and it's been kind of mildly bugging me for the last 10 years or 20 years, to me what's more significant about that shift is the dependent arising of perception. And for that coin to drop, it may well come back. It doesn't take anything away from the insight if it comes back an hour later, 10 minutes later. In the long run of things, the fruit of seeing that through playing with perception, what I perceive as a lock actually is liberated, is unlocked. Understanding then the dependent arising of perception, therefore the implication for emptiness, that is way more significant than I've got rid of a discomfort that has been kind of bugging me for 20 years. You want to say something, Sabra? Yeah, I think that's what kind of the power of what I've been playing with is really seeing this tendency to look at the problem and the training in widening back out again and coming back to the fuller fabric of the energy body, even whether or not the lock is unlocking. Yeah, so thank you. That's a middle ground as well. So you've got even this, again, if I had to hierarchize these three things, you've got this knot, this lock that has been with me for 20 years on and off, and it's just kind of just wish it would go away. And it does, it goes away forever. Versus what you just said, I've trained the attention and the chitta so that when there is some discomfort in the body, I don't have to go there. I can actually put my attention elsewhere and be pretty happy, and there's this lock there. And then the third one, where one actually sees that the lock itself is empty, because when I look at it in a certain way, it dissolves. If I had to put that in hierarchy of order and importance, I would put the disappearing of this bugging thing, I would put that at the bottom. And then what you said, and then the emptiness one at the top. So just this training, thank you for saying that, it's so important. Again, we wouldn't, it's really understanding, again, what's the relative significance of different experiences that we have? But this has everything to do, and I'll maybe come back to this. Why are we practicing? What are we practicing for? And how easily we can have, I'll say this again, it's up to us why we practice. It's up to you. You can have any reason why you practice. It's not for me to tell you why to practice. That's for you to find out why do I want to practice. But the range of possibilities of what we're looking for when we practice is huge. Sometimes what kind of person very consciously just chooses something quite small in terms of the reason they're practicing. What also happens though is over time the reasons for practice shrink somehow or other. That's quite interesting as well. Or we've just not been told what fruit there is on offer. And so we're kind of operating under a limited menu of potential. So all this is actually really, really key. Does that make sense? I'm going to stop trying to remember what the other thing is going to say. Does that feel okay for now, Sabra? Definitely. Yeah, okay, good. Is there anyone else who has? Yeah, Mikael, just to give more people a chance. Yeah, Mikael, please. I would like to ask about in relation to this discussion about the malleability of perception in regards to pain, because as you mentioned in some talk before, one can through this practice start to slowly notice that actually any Vedana, any experience can be sort of looked, can be seen as pleasant. Any Vedana can be seen as pleasant. If there is pain, one can sort of see and distillate or somehow, that's the word you used, filter out the pleasant out of the mix and just take that in. And once that really gets going, at least I got really excited about that. It was exhilarating and wow, this is meaningful, this is really deep. And some intuition in me says that, well, this is, it's possible to go wrong or it's possible to overdo this. If one gets first contact with such a malleability of perception in regards to pain, one can get an impression that this is what freedom from suffering is all about and then starts to apply this with almost like any experience, any pain all the time, like bliss, bliss, bliss, bliss, yeah, give me that. And it's wonderful for a time for sure, but then an intuition in me says that that is not completely healthy in the long run and there might be sort of like a mistake or a risk of mistake in view. What would you comment on this? Yeah, trust your intuition. Absolutely. Because to me, if someone hears this idea, it came up recently on a seminar I did, someone can hear this idea and almost get the idea that, oh, if I just get really good at that, then I can have a pain free life and then they just start trying to do this everywhere. And that would be missing the point. The point is this ability to play with perception to the degree that something painful becomes something pleasant, for example, or becomes just an empty space or lots of other possibilities, you know, or becomes the face of the Buddha nature or the face of God or whatever. This ability to play with perception, if I limit it to this pain to pleasure thing and then I think, oh, great, what a useful thing, and then I'm trying to live without pain, that's just, again, it's actually taking what's not, there's two gifts on offer and one takes the much, much poorer one, which is freedom from pain. Now that sounds like it's dharma because dharma is about reducing suffering and all that. No, the lesson from it, the potential lesson from it, and it will have to sit within a context of other teachings on emptiness and other kinds of playing with perception and all that stuff, is that perception is malleable and is that nothing exists as anything in particular, a thing is not this or that or anything independent of the way of looking. That tells me, eventually I see that in lots of different ways, to lots of different depths and degrees, through lots of different directions, and that starts telling me about the emptiness of all phenomena. No phenomena whatsoever is fundamentally existent as anything in itself. It is this or that dependent on the way of looking. That is a knowledge and a knowledge that can come in to, you know, just intellectually, into the heart and then the knowledge that everything is radically empty like that, to me, liberates in a much grander way. It liberates independent of this pain or that pain. It liberates in relation to the whole of existence and all phenomena. It brings, I say even more important, it brings a kind of unspeakable joy and wonder and sense of mystery and grace into the whole fabric of existence at a very deep level. To me, that is the point. If rather than now I am just really good at, hopefully I can get to the end of my life without any pain, it just seems a little narrow to me. Yeah, you can use that occasionally when things are rough, but that is not the point. The point is more what is it telling me? Now, if I just experience it once or twice, it will be like, well, okay, but if I start to experience lots of different ways, at some point or to some degree the coin drops about the nature of existence itself, about the nature of things, the way things are, the true nature of things, the emptiness, the suchness of phenomena. And knowing that liberates in a much broader and deeper way rather than this or that instance. I can still have this pain or that whatever, but it liberates in relation to life and death. And it brings, I would say, a wonder and a sense of sacredness that is almost difficult to put into words, the level at which one, and to me that is the point. Anyway, anyone is good, just like the mastery thing, no one is going to be able to do that all the time. And the Buddha was in plenty of pain in his old age and had to, it was only a certain kind of meditation that would release him from the perceptions of pain, et cetera. I can say, struggling with pain quite a lot at times. So again, it is like, what is significant, what is not? So your intuition is spot on there. What is the real gift here? It is much vastering scale than just that kind of neat trick that we can do that helps us feel better. Thank you. Maybe one more, did you have something? We need the mic, sorry. Oh, is there anyone else, Jason, that is happy to give up his... Anyone else? Okay. So on the issue of locks in the body, I think for better and worse, I have been exposed to some teaching that has really emphasized that, maybe overemphasized that, and for periods of my practice, I have overemphasized that, unlocking things and opening somatic blocks. It has gotten much gentler, and it has been a concept that has been present here a lot, but only insofar as it prevents the flow of energy that would allow PT and Jhana states. So I am glad about that. The thing I was curious to ask you about, it was related to something I talked to Robert about earlier today, which was, in the long term, big picture, do you see those as things that could suggest certain life changes or lifestyle changes outside of practice in order to work with or relieve one of them? Do the locks suggest that it might be a good idea to do certain lifestyle changes? Yeah. Oh, some of them might, yeah. I used to have, for many years, a kind of cramping of the lower intestine, and it was just a very common, uncomfortable sensation. It felt like something was locking there. I was a very, very regular visitor in my meditation practice for years and years and years. I learned a lot about clinging and perception and letting go and everything, for which I am really, really grateful. I came at what was not terrible, but actually, ongoing difficulty was something I learned a lot from. In hindsight, it was also, I found that when I eventually found, because I had ulcerative colitis and Crohn's, when I found a certain kind of probiotic and started taking that, that eased a lot. So, yes. I think I was speaking more about, like, what we talked about was kind of suppressed desire or things that I might want that I'm not seeing through or things that I might say that I'm not saying. Okay. But something like that may or may not express itself as a lock in the body. In other words, what often happens is someone suppresses their desire or doesn't see a project through that they want, and there's no sense of anything being particularly locked in the body. What's actually happening in the body is they're not allowing energy to build up in the body. So, they don't particularly experience a sort of great holding contraction thing. So, I don't know about using that as an indicator of something psychological necessary. At a very subtle level, and we'll come back to this, we've already touched on it. At a very subtle level, the presence of a lock is, the presence of the perception of a lock in any moment or a contraction in the body is an indicator at a very subtle level that there's aversion present in the mind, subtle aversion. But that's more to do again with dependent arising and insight practices that come in when I release that aversion. Lo and behold, the sense of the lock unfolds, dissolves. So, some of these more, let's say, I don't know what you call them, personality locks or stuff like that, they may or may not express themselves in long-term physical stuff. And sometimes with people they do very clearly, and it may or may not be related to these larger issues, and sometimes they don't really express at all or in any noticeable way. And sometimes they express in a way that's not obvious to that person, even when they've practiced a lot with the energy body. But maybe obvious to someone else who's kind of a bit more sensitive to that and used to it. The person doesn't realize they hold in a certain way, and that may be to do with, yeah, some more psychological they hold in relation to life or in relationship with someone or in relation to their self-expression, they're just holding back. And sometimes it's sensible to someone else, but they have no notion of it at all, because it's actually quite subtle and there's no discomfort with it. Sometimes the thing about these more severe is there's discomfort, and discomfort is like waving a red flag, saying something's wrong here. So there can be the whole range there, really. I think what's more important here is that if you look at your life and you feel like, I am kind of squashing my libido, in the larger sense, libido, in a certain way, or I'm dampening my desire, or I'm not allowing, I'm not in some way inhibiting either my desire to accumulate and burn or my desire to follow through or whatever, that's extremely significant, I would say, massively significant. And again, all that can hide under a nice Buddhist facade of well-behaved, equanimous yogi who lets go a lot very well, maybe you should be a teacher. So this is a really, really important point, I would say, and to take that up as an investigation, then you can see, okay, how much does that have to do? How much are these physical locks really trustworthy as indicators of the relationship where that is? But probably, if that's the kind of thing you're talking about, long-term projects and stuff, my guess is that the physical manifestations will only be partially helpful as indicators. There's a bigger thing going on, and your job will be to investigate that. Going back to what we said in terms of the views as well, what views are operating, what, so in terms of those one, two, three that I said earlier, what views am I locked into? Maybe a view about desire, maybe a view about self, maybe a view about Buddhist practice, it could be all kinds of things, nothing to do with Buddhism, but the views. Then there might be, the other thing might be, the second one, it might be an emotional lock, this territory of actually sitting with a really strong desire, and everything I talked about the other day, and if it's really strong, it will burn. A lot of people say, I don't like burning, there's a danger that I won't get that, I'll be frustrated, I'll fail, people will think this, or I'll think this, or whatever it is. Or I just cannot tolerate that much desire, it's uncomfortable, or it can be uncomfortable sometimes. So it might be I just have kind of shut the door on that emotional territory. And then some of that, again the boundary between what's emotional, what's physical, what's emotional, what's energetic, there's not a clear boundary there. But again, it might be that a person, just I cannot tolerate that much energy in my being. So there's a lot of things here, I think it's immensely important, and what does it mean to be a liberated human being? What does it mean in relation to this? Am I really liberated if I can't actually feel any desire, or I can't follow through on desire, if my only option is to let go? Is that really liberation? You're not saying that, but it's a larger question. So to me it's really, really important. The investigation of all that is probably not something that's, it depends how long this has been around, but it's probably not something that happens, ah, I got it now, you know. There may be long-term habits here of thinking, of view, of energetics, of emotional territory, all kinds of things. So it may take a while, it may involve all kinds of explorations from all different angles and levels and all that, but I think it's hugely important. So I don't know, does that... Yeah, totally, yeah, very normalizing. And again, you could decide to see that as an investigation that's outside of Dharma, or you can expand your view of what Dharma is, and that becomes an investigation that's really at the core of Dharma. In a way that's up to you, it doesn't really matter, but there's certainly ways of doing it both ways, in or out. So I think it's very important. Thanks. Yeah. Okay. So just, I'm not sure whether to read these notes. Someone's written, it's anonymous, I don't know if that was intentional or not, but it says, you don't even need the Jhana to be happy. I realize this today, and it totally blew my mind, just wanted to share that. Yeah, totally, that's totally right. I'm just wondering if I've missed something here, or if the person wants to say a bit more. Yeah, please. I was in a hurry when I wrote it. Yeah, yeah, great, good. Yeah, so two things. Go ahead. Oh yeah, please, please come in, yeah, thanks. But I wanted, I was in a very happy mood when I wrote it. And there was a relief coming from it. Yeah. Yeah? Yeah, good. Yeah, so this is what I wondered, this is really important. So two things here. One is that as we practice the Jhana more, the Jhana factors like PT and sukha, happiness, can come up outside of a formal session, very, very strongly. And sometimes it's very obvious to see the connection with, for example, a sitting we've just had. We get up and we're in the lunch queue and we're just overflowing with happiness. But sometimes it seems almost a bit random. It's just like it wasn't going so well and then suddenly there's this eruption of happiness. So that's all very normal. The Jhana factor of sukha can come up even very strongly outside of an actual Jhana, outside of the total absorption in it. There is still an important difference between absorbing into Jhana and everything really collected and the happiness. But the happiness itself is also really a treasure. To gather it more, we marinate in it and sit in it. But this is really great. But then also, as you said, it was a relief because sometimes, again, so much can happen. You say, OK, this is the goal and there's these stages and there's eight of them. And then there's this idea of mastery. And it's so easy for the self-measuring and the critic and all that to come in. And then we get, you know, it's all very tight. And then we realize, oh, actually, it doesn't need to be so black and white. Have I got it? Have I not? It can come up anywhere. And that takes some pressure off. So that's great. And then thirdly, you know, which isn't what you were saying, but, yeah, it should be obvious. There's plenty of people who experience happiness in the world who've never heard the word Jhana and never had Jhana. So happiness is just what wasn't what you were saying, Hannah. But we should realize that too, that we're not saying here that no one who has an experience to Jhana can ever be ever experience happiness. No. But there is something about the degree of Jhana happiness that I think is the potential that is sometimes there that is pretty extraordinary. That, as you found, can come off the cushion as if I've never been this, this sort of happy, you know. So all that is great. Yeah. And on that note, I just read this. I don't know again, depending on how your hindrances are doing and how your pop-punch is doing and all that right now. Should I read this? Leave it. I'll leave it. Huh? No. Did someone say no? Oh, OK. Can you sign something that you take responsibility for? OK. Dear Rob, in second I heard the central heating as happiness, and that pretty much blew the roof off. So against playing with perception or a perception was played with just by being in the Jhana. More joy than I have ever felt ever. Then I came out of third Jhana. This is someone who's done, worked, spent a lot of time working on this stuff in the past. So it's not their first Jhana retreat. Then I came out of third to walk and everyone seemed like these radiant translucent Buddhas, which is what you are, by the way. Wow. So it doesn't sound like there's a question there, but there's some sharing. OK, we should probably end because if my interviews are seven. One other thing. No, I think I'll leave it for now. Let's just have a bit of quiet together. OK. OK. Thank you everybody. And time for tea. And thanks.

 Okie doke. So today I want to talk about the third jhana. And remember what we were saying with the pacing of the teachings will almost certainly not be the pacing of your practice, and if it is, we actually don't want that. So you might cross over. Your optimal pacing of practice for this retreat may intersect the trajectory of the pacing of the teachings at one point, but it shouldn't more than that, right? Because you're going at your optimum pace for marination, for mastery, for right? Ok, so the third jhana. What does the Buddha say about the third jhana? If you get hold of the text of the Pali Canon, it's about a shelf load full of volumes, I don't know if anyone's counted how many times he talks about jhana in there, but it's a lot. It's really, really a lot. So much so that they barely print it again, they just say, as before, as before, as before. Just to give you a sense of if that suggests that maybe how much priority he put on the jhanas in his way of teaching. That doesn't mean everyone needs to learn the jhanas. There are I mean some people think that. One of my teachers said, if there's no jhana, there's no liberation. I'm not sure I agree. I would tend not to agree, but it does seem looking at the Buddha that he put, you know, there's I think two suttas where he really talks about mindfulness. So I don't know how many suttas in the whole Pali Canon. Does anyone know, roughly? A thousand, I'm not sure. So two of those thousand, let's say it's a thousand, are about mindfulness, one of which you'll be very familiar with, the Satipatthana Sutta. And then there's a lot, a lot, a lot of suttas on jhana practice. So we've kind of inherited a sense of a norm that probably doesn't actually historically reflect the kinds of practice that certainly the monastics we're doing. Anyway, so here he is speaking about the jhanas again, speaking to a group of monks. And so he's just gone through the first and second jhana. And then he says, and furthermore, with the fading of pete, with the fading of rapture, he, the monk practicing, remains in equanimity, mindful and alert and physically sensitive to sukkha. With the fading of rapture, he remains in equanimity, mindful and physically sensitive to sukkha. He enters and remains in the third jhana. And of him, the noble ones, the enlightened ones declare, equanimous and mindful, he has a pleasurable abiding. And the monk permeates and pervades, suffuses and fills this very body with the sukkha divested of pete, with the sukkha with the pete removed, filtered out, gone from it. So with the pervades, permeates and pervades, suffuses and fills this very body with happiness divested of pete, so that there is nothing of his entire body unpervaded with sukkha divested of pete. And then really good to me, very gorgeous appealing simile, just as in a pond of blue, white and red lotuses. There may be some of the blue, white or red lotuses which, born and growing in the water, stay immersed in the water, and flourish without standing up out of the water, so that they are permeated and pervaded, suffused and filled with cool water from their roots to their tips. And nothing of those blue, white or red lotuses would be unpervaded with cool water. Even so, the monk or just so, the monk permeates this very body with the sukkha divested of rapture. There is nothing of his entire body unpervaded with sukkha divested of rapture. Okay, so when we come to talk about jhana factors, I couldn't find the sukkha, it's possible that there's times when the Buddha says the first jhana has five factors, the second jhana has two factors, three factors, excuse me, the third jhana has two factors, etc. But I couldn't find it. Anyway, most people agree that the third jhana has only two jhana factors, sukkha and ekha-gata. So, but this text I've just read from the Buddha says all this other business, right? It says, it says, it says, where's it gone, equanimous, with the fading of PT, he remains in equanimity, mindful and alert. Mindful is sati, equanimity, upekka, and paali, you probably know those words, the alert, the actual word is sampajana, which some people translate as clearly comprehending. It goes a lot with the sort of mindfulness language and it's very prevalent in the mindfulness sutta. So, you've got these other elements or aspects that clearly the Buddha is pointing to, but they don't qualify as jhana factors. I think there's something that once you practice third jhana, we'll see something similar in the fourth jhana, there's something a little bit misleading about the Buddha's description. So, it's not at all the case that there isn't mindfulness and alertness and equanimity in the third jhana, there absolutely is, but the primary nimitta is sukha without PT, and or is actually sukha, pure sukha, if you like. Now, pure sukha, sukha without PT is actually quite a rare thing for a human being. So, mostly even in non-jhanic states, we experience happiness with a bit of, certainly when we're laughing or giggling or whatever, it's got that kind of upwell to it. It's got sort of, let's say, proto-jhanic factors of PT and sukha in it. It's quite rare to have happiness without PT. I use the word and I think what's more accurate, speaking from an experiential point of view, is that the primary nimitta of the third jhana is peacefulness. Peacefulness. And that peacefulness is almost unbelievably lovely. It is warm, it's tender, it's very, very refined. So, if you're in any doubt, you know, have I reached the next jhana, wherever you've been, one way of knowing is, is it more refined than the jhana that you've come from? So, you may have moved from something where the dominant element in the citta is happiness, to a state where the dominant element in the citta is something like peacefulness. But if that peacefulness is not a total quantum leap in refinement, then it's unlikely that you've moved from the second to the third jhana. So, that's one thing to look for. And remember what I said, this actually, what's happening, the whole spectrum of the jhanas is there's this increasing refinement as we develop through the jhanas. That's the, in a way, well, let's just say, one of the key elements. So, there's something very lovely. There's a warmth, there's a real tenderness. It's got heart qualities in it in a very, a very kind of soft undramatic way. Well, undramatic, it might be dramatic when you first enter it in terms of it really is breathtaking, but the way those qualities pervade the space is not dramatic in terms of the heart qualities. There's an increase in refinement. It's a very refined state. There's really, I would say, it's very beautiful. There's something, again, almost breathtakingly beautiful about it. It feels very healing. There's something about that space and bathing oneself and dissolving one's body and heart and mind in that space that just feels naturally, organically healing, again, in a very sort of undramatic, quiet, but very powerful way in terms of healing the heart and etc. There's love in it. There's metta in it. Let's say that there's metta in it organically. You don't have to make that happen. And there's a kind of all these qualities, just part of the radiant glow of that space, of that jhanic territory. So, yes, there's mindfulness. Yes, there's alertness. And yes, there's equanimity. But we would expect mindfulness and alertness in any jhana. Here, they may be upgraded quite a bit to what most people, unless you've really gotten into a momentum on a mindfulness retreat and really there's quite, you know, there's a lot of mindfulness and alertness. And yes, there's equanimity, but let's come back to that one at the end because most people who haven't experienced, let's say, the third and fourth jhana, there's what one will understand by the word equanimity based either on one's daily life or on meditation practice, insight meditation practice is we're really talking about a different level here, a different flavor. And so that's why I said it can be a little misleading if we focus on the other words right now. There is equanimity. I'll come back to that. So in my experience, and part of the way I teach this, so that's the third jhana, all that loveliness. I would actually break it down into three levels. So the third jhana itself has three levels. And I did read a text somewhere, I think it was in the Vasudimarga, a passage saying different jhanas break into three levels or two levels or something, but I don't recall actually describing what those levels are, I don't know whether this division that I'm making now based on experience and teaching experience, whether that corresponds to the Vasudimarga, I don't personally really mind either way. I just find this very helpful and a lot of other people do. So there's three levels. The first level, and I are following the Buddha's lovely simile of this gorgeous cool pond in a hot climate, the first level near the top, as you say, because there's a descent through the jhanas, one feels them that way. The first level is characterized actually, if I had to put an English word to it, it would be like contentment or satisfaction, or perhaps something like fulfillment, but that's a more complicated word, I think. So something like contentment and satisfaction. But again, unlikely to be the level of contentment, the fullness, the degree of contentment and satisfaction at the beginning of the third jhana is unlikely to be something that we've experienced in daily life. It's really of a different order there. The second level, the middle level, is the peacefulness that comes to dominate. But in a way, it feels like my peacefulness. I'm peaceful. This space here is peaceful. It's not that I'm thinking or mind, mind, and I'm hanging onto it in any way. It's just I partly sees that only in contrast when one's gone to the deeper level, the third level, which kind of feels more like a realm of peacefulness. One's in a realm. One's in a vast space, or one has a sense, let's say that's a better way to put it, one has a sense of a space of peacefulness, a vast space pervaded by peacefulness, a world of peacefulness. So at this point, it really is, and I'll come back to this, it really is like I've entered a different world here, as opposed to first jhana, second jhana, something extraordinary is happening in my body, in my chitta, in my consciousness, in my energy body. Here, at times it can feel like I've really entered a different world. So those are the three levels that I would demarcate and encourage people to find, but the order in which they will be revealed to you may not be one, two, three. In other words, you may find yourself first in the middle one or the third one or whatever. No rush. In time, they will all become apparent and we want them to all become familiar and just as we have mastery with regard to a jhana, I can go there directly or whatever, you can also navigate within a jhana. So if you wanted to, you can go from the fourth jhana to the most superficial level of the third jhana, that contentment or whatever. You can just jump to wherever. No rush with that. It's part of the mastery, it's part of really knowing them. It will emerge just from everything that we've been doing, sitting with it, walking with it, being in it, but keeping the sensitivity, the antennae tuned, alive, alert, subtly discriminating, noticing, and just enjoying and these things will get revealed. So how does one access, how does one enter the third jhana? One way is to just be in the second jhana with the happiness, but really drink it. Really drink and drink and drink that happiness. Drink and drink and enjoy that drinking. We have a thirst we don't even recognize and in a way we need to slake that thirst. Just drink and drink and enjoy. At a certain point one may realize, oh, the most prominent emotion has changed. It's actually gone from happiness to this satisfaction, to this contentment. Why? Because I've drunk enough, I've actually satisfied that thirst. Sometimes at first one may not realize that shift. If it goes to that level, it may, as I said, jump to a deeper level. One way of moving here from the second to the third jhana, just really drink that happiness and really, really enjoy it and really open to all the things we've been saying. I need to really tune to it, really stay with it and take it in and bathe in it and enjoy it or drink it. A second possibility though is that as we've mentioned a couple of times in here, it's come up in questions, the happiness of the second jhana has arranged to it. At the deep end, it's actually more subtle. Technically speaking, it's got more pete in it and at the deep end of the second jhana, it's got less pete in it. The pete is drained out and that's why the happiness there is more serene. That corresponds with the Buddha's description. But in a way, there's a way of understanding the second jhana as a kind of transition jhana. Pete and sukha in the first jhana with a lot of pete dominating, less pete all the way through the second jhana until the pete is drained out and you're just left with this purified sukha. That's one way of understanding it. There's a kind of spectrum of less and less pete and correspondingly, there's a spectrum of more and more subtleized happiness. You can either drink your fill with the happiness or go with this ride the spectrum down into more and more subtlety. Eventually, like all the other jhanas, if we're talking about mastery, you can just summon it. You don't need to go from the second jhana. You don't need to do anything. You just remember the third jhana and call it back by a subtle intention. If one is going through letting the happiness get more and more subtle, absolutely, totally crucial that the attention needs to get increasingly subtle with it and that you need to get really into it. If again, if it's like subtle pete, subtle happiness, it doesn't need to be strong for me to totally relish it and totally enjoy it and totally get into it. If the attention is not fully maximally subtle and if I'm not fully maximally enjoying it, what I will end up with is a state of peacefulness or perhaps will end up with is either I'll get lost or fall asleep or a kind of state of peacefulness that is actually slightly dull, slightly insensitive and the peacefulness will not be so alluring and so magical in that way. Even these words dull and insensitive, again, to most people they mean something quite gross. At this level, we're talking about dullness. We're also talking about really subtle dullness, really subtle insensitivity. Compared to our normal state of consciousness, they're not gross, obvious defects. But if I'm taking that second method of going down in terms of the subtlety of the happiness, I absolutely have to really be on my toes with the attention, really subtleizing attention, really getting into it, really making sure I'm opening, enjoying, penetrating, all the rest of it. There's a slide, but where that slide takes us to depends very much on what the mind is doing and what the relationship with it is. What that all implies to me is the safest bet actually is the first way, just drink that happiness. Drink it and drink it and drink it and drink it and open it. Slake your thirst. This kind of, I don't know what we'd call it, a satellite non-janic state of equanimity or peacefulness. As we've mentioned several times in here, and I've said, it can be likely that one goes there because of the habitual tracks and momentum of one's previous insight meditation practice. We talked about this. If you practice mindfulness and once that gets going, you're basically practicing a kind of let go, let go, let go. As I'll come back to at the end today, that will take you into some or other state of equanimity. It's a very okay state. It's relatively speaking, it's a skillful state, but it's unlikely that it's the third jhana. If that's just, oh, I recognize this place from before, kind of quiet place I've got to sometimes in on retreats before, whatever it is, peaceful. It seems to match. Well, there's peacefulness, there's mindfulness, there's equanimity, there's alertness, et cetera, but it's unlikely to be that, I mean, it might be, but it's unlikely. Again, what this partly implies to me is to maybe safest to go with the first one, drink, drink, drink the happiness and keep, kind of see if you can keep it at a certain bandwidth where it's really this is obvious happiness and it's not something quite strong. It may be possible that, you know, that kind of non-jhanic equanimity, peacefulness state, can get kind of nudged, maneuvered into a jhanic state like the third jhana. If you hang out there, so this is the kind of state I remember from my insight retreats, and if I hang out there, but really the attention has to be really, really alive, really subtle, and really maximizing the enjoyment, really trying to find what's most pleasurable in here. It may be possible for some people that then that sort of more familiar insight state of equanimity with very careful work play becomes the third jhana, but it will likely, it will probably be much more likeable and much clearer experiences of the third jhana if they go through the second jhana in the way that I was, either of the ways I was talking about, but more likely that drinking one. So then you'll more likely end up in what's definitely jhana territory rather than the sort of relatively skillful or only a sort of relatively skillful piece or equanimity. So like I said, in relation to differentiating this third jhana from those kind of relatively peaceful sort of states that we might know of equanimity or peace to a certain degree, and what we might call satellite states, maybe, the third jhana again is breathtakingly touching. There's something that touches the being, impresses on the body, the heart, the soul very, very profoundly. It's really very touching, as I said, a beautiful beauty there. It's very beautiful, really an extraordinary state, and it really does impress on the whole being. So yes, this differentiation between states, and remember I said I contradict myself many times, and sometimes we don't need to worry so much about am I in it, am I out, where exactly is the boundary. Instead, just work and play with this care which gets very fine now, the work and play, but it's still sassy, still sassy at this level, and rather am I in, am I out, just keep playing with the sassy and let your work and play be also quite subtle and intense but in this very subtle, very gentle way. So I actually have to learn that about how to work intensely without being too crude and too heavy-handed and too pressured. So I can't remember, I thought it was in the Pali Canon something the Buddha said, but it might be in the Vasudimaga. There's a simile of a desert traveler, someone who's been walking for days and days across a desert, going from somewhere to somewhere, and they're parched with thirst, and they're weary, and they're dirty, and sand is everywhere, and staggering along. And then in the distance they see, or even someone tells them, they see an oasis, and that relief and glee and excitement even that they feel, that corresponds to the first Jhana. It's not a mirage, it's actual oasis. And the second Jhana in this simile is they reach the oasis and they flop down by the side of it on their hands and knees, and they just drink and drink and drink that cool water. And their thirst, which has built up over wandering the desert is samsara basically, and their thirst begins to be slaked. They need to drink a lot, they're pretty dehydrated, they need to drink and drink and drink. And the third Jhana, at a certain point, they just decide, I'm just going to get in, and they just immerse themselves into this beautiful, cool, spring-fed pond with lotuses there, and they just dunk themselves, and they wash their body, and they submerge themselves, and they drink some more, and all that. That's the third Jhana. So, like I said, the ordinary usage in English of words like happiness and peacefulness and equanimity, it doesn't really capture the kind of degree and depth and beauty and impact, and the whole other level that we're talking about here with Jhana factors and Jhana words, and certainly when you get to the third Jhana, that's the case. Okay, so a little bit about working in the third Jhana. As I mentioned, the third level, to me, feels like a sense of a realm, of a much wider, perhaps a vaster space even. But this is quite important. The focus within that sense of, I'm in a whole other world here, the primary focus needs to still be the whole body space, the energy body space. So you can still be aware, I'm really in this other realm, but the Jhana will only stabilize and deepen, and you'll only get its maximal fruits if the primary focus is on the whole body space, just so it's actually a bit bigger, you know. So it might be as much as two feet in front of you even, or whatever, that sort of space around the energy body. And you work with the same, you might work with these two modes of attention, the narrow focus penetrating, or the wide open receiving, abandoning, surrendering, or you might find others wrapping around, dissolving into all kinds. But basically the focus is the energy body, and moving gently in a very unhurried way, playing with these different modes of attention. That's what's going to consolidate it, allow it to get deeper, etc. So this, in the third level, the sense of that realm is, that sort of vaster realm is still there, but it's not the primary focus, yet we can still be touched by it, allow ourselves to have a sense of the appreciation of that, of that lovely space, that larger lovely space. Appreciate it, be touched by it, and it's kind of otherworldly sense, and the other, the sense of really visiting another realm, of being admitted into another kind of more blessed realm in a way. So it's, if I say the primary focus is with the whole body and the energy body, it doesn't mean that I'm still not aware of this realm, and I can't still feel the beauty of that, and the loveliness of that. And one can kind of invite, or imagine bringing in, or just bring in that sense of peacefulness from the bigger space, in or just allow it in, open the energy body space to it. So in some way or another, all that lovely, lovely peacefulness from that space, you bring it in to the energy body if you need to. Sometimes, and I think this came up in, someone asked a question, so it's come up earlier, but I'll say it again, but sometimes what happens, but this should only be the kind of thing that happens and that you're playing with after you've had quite a lot of experience with the third genre. Sometimes what happens is it hasn't quite settled yet, it's not quite consolidated, I'm not quite into it yet, I've had many experiences before of it, and all I can find then is like a filament, the barest, subtlest sort of magical thread, very, very faint, very subtle of that, that has the taste of that peacefulness. And all I can find is one, and maybe it's in one place in my body. Now body might be body, it's in my belly, or whatever body might be, remember when I said, when I say whole body, it means the space, right? I said that defining at the beginning, right? So when I, again, here, I say it's not necessarily, I'm not correlating it with any part of my anatomy, it's just somewhere in this space, but it feels like it's connected with my body. Usually things get, feel like they start getting lower down, the center of the attention starts getting lower down, maybe even the place where initially the, in this case, the peacefulness is stronger, is lower down the body. That's common, but there are always exceptions, and eventually, obviously, we want the whole space to be filled with that peacefulness. But sometimes what happens, a lot of experience, and this session, it's not quite going so well, or it's fine, I can tell, I just need to play a little bit. And all I can find is this one really, really subtle thread. And I start to follow that, I'm tuning to it, and I'm just enjoying that thread, and tuning the attention to it, and finding the beauty in it. And that, just that relationship with that thread, so to speak, that filament of it starts to allow the whole thing to spread, starts to allow the peacefulness, the fabric of that filament of that thread to spread throughout the whole space. Often by itself, so you can still do the spreading stuff, of course, but often you'll find it just spreads by itself at this point. Now, I don't know if I said it in relation to the second genre, but something similar can happen with the second genre. If you've had a lot of experience with the second genre, really clear experience with the second genre, a lot in and out many times, then sometimes again, it's sort of, oh, today's not quite kind of got into it, or it's there, but it's really not strong, it's kind of in boundary territory, in borderline territory. Again, sometimes it might be a trickle, that I'm drinking from a trickle, just a little trickle from a fountain, but I'm drinking it, and I'm really enjoying it. And again, if I don't get into that, oh, it was better yesterday, or whatever, and I'm just really drinking, then that trickle, I follow that trickle, I tune to its qualities, I enjoy it, all the same things, and it can build from there. Well, in a way, it's true for the first because of how we've been talking about the two possibilities of PT arising, that one of them is like the ember, and glowing, so in a way, it's true. Okay, sometimes what happens with, again, with quite a bit of experience with the third genre already, one of the things, remember, like I said, when you encounter a new territory, a new jhanic territory, a new level of consciousness, whatever you want to call it, a new state of consciousness, the first few experiences are often like a dam bursting, and it's just that everything is perfect and wow, and there's no effort involved, or very little effort. After a while, then it's like, oh, then certain subtle work, subtle play is obviously needed. It's not that one's gone backwards, this is just the natural maturation of things. If one is not noticing subtle work and play, I would say, I'm not sure that one is practicing what the Buddha would call right concentration, because there isn't that degree of sensitive, subtle discernment to actually notice, oh, I see, that's different, you know, or this thing or that thing. So one of the things that one can notice after a while that can happen sometimes is that it's almost like there's a mental aspect of this lovely peacefulness, this gorgeous peacefulness, and there's, so to speak, a physical aspect of this gorgeous peacefulness. In other words, felt in the energy body, and they can become separated sometimes. The mental and the physical peacefulness can become separated. We want them integrated. We want the whole thing, the whole, you know, like, let's say, clearly jhanic experience have integrated all these elements. So we want them integrated. So it could be that you know, you've practiced really a fair amount with the third jhana in and out, and you've really got used to it. And then you start to notice this sometimes, occasionally you start to notice this. It could be either of those comes first, like I'm experiencing a mental peacefulness that I recognize from the third jhana, but not the bodily or the other way around. Okay, so it could be either, but they're not integrated, and they're not one is at one is present, one is not absent. Breath, the breath can really help to integrate them. Or I suppose the metta at that point. But the breath particularly, if you've been doing, if you've been doing breath practice, especially, because it will, but breath anyway is something that kind of it's very easy for the, say it's, there's a way that the mind can follow the breath, not just follow it with attention, but follow the way the breath is tells us how the mind is. The way someone's breath is, it's, you know, this at a very gross level. So the mind and breath are quite related. So bringing the breath back in, if you've been working with the breath can be quite helpful at integrating the mental and the physical. So that's why, you know, this relationship between breath and mind, you know, it's mostly we're taught not not to manipulate the breath in meditation, right? You just watch it, but breath does give how my breath is at any moment does reflect how my mind is at any moment. And so in a way, the mind is shaping the breath. But if I also like so many things, if the, if the causality seems to work one way, often works the other way too. If I shape the breath, I can affect my mind. And that's why we, you know, when we started with this really longest breath and said, and with the energy body, breathing really long breaths, because we often need more energy. And then that's why the, the, the anapanasati sutta starts with breathing in long, you know, this turn out, whatever that person was doing, breathing in long and then breathing in short. To me, it's deliberate, because the manipulation of the breath manipulates the mind, which if you're trying to settle the mind is what you're trying to do anyway. So you actually settle the mind, shape the mind through playing gently subtly responsibly with the breath. Anyway, breath in into breath integrates or is a bridge or straddles body and mind. And so at this point, if the mental peacefulness is there, but the bodily peacefulness is not or vice versa, bringing the breath back in can help can help one of the things that can help integrate them. But really with these rupa jhanas with these first four jhanas is I say body, body, body, body, body, body. It's maybe more likely for people to feel like they're experiencing a mental peacefulness. And there really isn't the sense of that peacefulness pervading the body, like to that degree. So as I said, there may be a thread or just a place in the energy body, it's just a location in this space of the energy body, it may be very, very subtle, and tuning to that focusing on it, following it, enjoying it, etc. Or it may be there's a sense of here's this realm, it may be I've already got a sense of the third level, but it's still not integrated and settled. And I want to kind of immerse the body in that realm immerse the body in the peacefulness, but I have to get the body involved. So always you hear in the Buddha's description, he says it in each short paragraph, he says it twice about getting the whole body involved, no spot untouched, pervading, suffusing, etc. Over and over again, body, body, body with these form jhanas. So I really have to make sure I work to get the body sense filled like that and really involved and really pervaded, etc. So I can immerse my body in this space of peacefulness, I can dissolve my body out, so to speak, I dissolve my energy body out into that peacefulness, or I dissolve the peacefulness into the body and all these things. But so much has to do with tuning again. It's really again, what's happening in each jhana is not that we're paying attention to it and keeping our mind fixed on one small physical or one small location in space, we're tuning to a certain frequency. And the frequency that we're tuning to in the third jhana is very, very refined. So it's really about tuning at this point, tuning to that very, that radio station that has that really otherworldly, transcendently peaceful music. And I just want to learn, learn to tune there. And really that fine tuning and then pay attention, attune and let things amplify from there. Experientially, the third jhana is, you know, there's a, I suppose because there's a quantum jump in stillness from the first to the second jhana, and then there's a whole other quantum jump in stillness from the second to the third. So it's a very still state. And sometimes people's initial descriptions when they first enter it in an interview, they describe and they say, oh, it was really still. It is very still compared to what most human beings will ever have remotely, remotely come near experiencing. But yet, there is actually a very, very subtle, gentle movement in it that's possible that there's very, very subtle gentle movements within it. Almost so if you've been, you know, if the breath is your base practice, it's almost as if you'd forgotten about the breath. And then it's almost like it can reemerge at this point, but just really, really faint echoes of the breath. Just it's like one is almost not sure is that the breath or is that me just imagining a very subtle breath in a way it doesn't matter. But there can be this very gentle breath or very faint echoes of the breath, whatever it is. And they carry this very subtle, gentle movement that somehow there within the stillness, it doesn't in any way disturb the stillness, this movement. So it's almost like the very gentle movement is somehow integrated into the stillness without disturbing it, it feels the movement itself is very gentle movement seems itself the very movement seems to express stillness, which in English is a contradiction in words, but the very, there's something very beautiful about the movement. So it seems to really manifest or express this this lovely stillness. The image I had, I think I've shared it with a few of you is one image you might think of for this and that might even be help as helpful as a tiny tincture at certain points is imagine a kind of lagoon and or upon and under the water, so it's fairly deep water, but under the water, there's as long some a few long strands of, you know, nowhere to seaweed or something like that. And they're just, you know, how they sway sometimes really, really gently and slowly, something there may be some kind of movement in the experience that's akin to that. But and that may be with the breath or something else. But just put that out. Yeah. So like I said, if you've if the breath has been your base practice, then it may re emerge at this point and be re incorporated this that I've given all my attention to PT and happiness. And now now it's almost like after all that commotion and excitement and bubbliness of all that, the breath starts to oh, I can notice it again, and I can re incorporate it. But it's very subtle, very delicate. And again, the breath is peacefulness, it has become peacefulness just as the body has become peacefulness. The breath has become peacefulness. This movement of the seaweed at that point, that it I don't know if you can get the sense from me, just the image, it's like the very movement is peaceful, expresses peace, expresses a kind of stillness. If we think again about jhana factors, and think of them as kind of cooking ingredients, cooking or alchemy depend, dependent on what you what you prefer as a as a metaphor. So jhana factors as cooking or alchemy ingredients. And let's think backward from from the Buddhist sort of definitions. The first jhana has PT and sukha, and PT is the prominent one. The second jhana, as I said, has actually got this range. Sukha and PT are both there. But through the range of the second jhana, the PT is getting slowly filtered out. So that's said that before, but that's a way of understanding what's happening in the second jhana. The third jhana has sukha without PT, it's completely, completely filtered out. But what that also means is that sometimes it's possible, here I am in the third jhana. And if I want to go to the second jhana, I can just take some PT from the shelf, and just pour it in a little bit. And dependent on how much I pour in, stir, I will end up in a different place in the second jhana, right? Does that make sense? So again, to me, this is actually part of the art of part of the possible range of the art involved in this kind of thing. I'm actually titrating jhana factors in ways that can build and build where I want to go, or open up where I want to go. Yeah, so if I add a little PT, I'm going to end up in the deep end of the second jhana. If I had a lot of PT, I'm going to end up in the shallow end of the second jhana where things are more bubbly, etc. I'll repeat this when we talk about the fourth jhana, but a similar thing at the fourth jhana. If I'm in the fourth jhana, and I add sukha, because the fourth jhana, the sukha has gone as well. So the third jhana, the PT goes, fourth jhana, the sukha goes, we'll come back to this. If I'm in the fourth jhana, and I add sukha, I will end up in the third jhana. So there's a whole kind of, yeah, whatever you call it, alchemy or cooking possibilities, mixing ingredients, etc., that becomes possible. Now after time, in the third jhana, you may not notice it quite early on in your sort of openings to the third jhana. If the senses are open in the third jhana, you're still hearing the birds, or whatever it is, or other sounds, or even sounds that we wouldn't usually think of as pleasant, even sounds that we would usually think of as unpleasant. So let's say that the hearing is open. And remember, the Buddha is actually very, very clear in his words that it is not necessary for the senses to close in the first four jhanas. So if the senses are open, you're still hearing, which is very, very normal, then what one notices at some point is that all phenomena, all these sounds have, if we're taking sound as an example, they begin to be perceived as if they have one taste. There's something we notice pervading not just the so-called intra-psychic space in the jhana, but also the world outside, so to speak, the world of the senses. So they have this one taste, the sounds, even an ugly sound like someone drilling somewhere, or lawnmower, or whatever it is, begins to have this, everything has this one taste, and the taste is of this beautiful, profound peacefulness, so that the taste starts to spread. And basically, a kind of cosmic deep okayness, like very deep okayness, spreads throughout the cosmos, and everything in the cosmos seems to have that same taste. So that's an experience one can have, one probably will and should have as part of the ripening of the third jhana. That's an experience one can have in formal meditation. And then one gets up out of the meditation, goes to informal practice, goes for a walk, just hangs out, has a cup of tea, and one should begin to notice what I call the after-effects on perception. To me, this is a really, really important concept. It came up, I think, as Oiwa asked the other day, and someone else also wrote a report in a note. After-effects on perception of, in this case, we're talking about jhanas, but of a particular jhana. I've got up, I'm not practicing formally anymore, I'm just walking around on the lawn, or gone for a walk, or whatever, and I pay attention. If I'm still relatively open, relatively sensitive, relatively present, etc., I will begin to notice it starts, it probably starts here most clearly, in others at the third jhana, and will get more and more obvious, and in a way more and more significant and more and more powerful in its effects as we go more and more through the jhanas, particularly the formal jhanas. But one notices in the after-effects on perception that the world and the nature of things and the fabric of the cosmos are imbued with that peacefulness, that gorgeous, delicious, kind of almost mystical peacefulness, as if that is the nature of things, peace is the nature of things, peace is the fabric of the cosmos. This is pointing to what is probably the most significant thing in the dharma, or it's we have to pick it up though, we have to make the connections, and we have to see it and understand it and see it many, many times through this kind of experience, through other related kinds of insight experience, but it's pointing to the dependent arising of perception. The world, how the world appears to me, the very world that I live in is dependent on how I look at it. So everyone is living in the same world, well we are, but we also aren't. Dependent arising, the world is empty of being this way or that way ultimately. Any one thing is empty of being this way or that way ultimately, and one way, and I think one of the most powerful ways and one of the ways I like to emphasize in teaching is seeing that through, again we're back to through playing with perception and seeing the effects of this way of looking on the perception of self, other, world, time, everything, and then playing with that way of looking and seeing the effects on perception of self, other, world, time, phenomena, etc. And then another way of perceiving, another way of perceiving, and actually one can integrate that, integrate the whole of the Dharma into that exploration or even sum up the whole of the Dharma as that exploration. The most significant thing, dharmically I would say. So even something like generosity, we don't tend to think of that as playing with perception, but if you practice generosity and you pay attention and sometimes you practice a really radical generosity and see what happens to the perception of self, of other, of world, the whole of the Dharma, all the qualities that the Buddha is pointing to can be seen to be integrated into a certain movement of exploration, which is this exploration of dependent rising through playing with perception. The appearance of the world, the whole world depends on how I'm looking at any moment. So we could also say that's a teaching about karma. Where am I reborn? Do you understand that? Do you understand how that makes sense? Yeah. So another way of saying all this is a teaching on karma. If I, let's say, let's take two things. If I practice, let's take two pairs, kindness or unkindness and generosity or ungenera, or stinginess. Yeah, stinginess. Yeah. Kindness or unkindness, generosity and stinginess. And I practice those things. I practice stinginess and I, to different degrees, and I notice the effect on how myself feels. Not that I'm judging myself so much, but just how does myself feel? How does my energy body feel? How does myself feel more solid, more contracted? How does the world feel? Do I feel connected with the world or does the world feel somehow separate? Do I feel a kind of oneness or do I feel a separation? All these things. Same thing with kindness. I practice unkindness or kindness or I practice generosity. So basically what you'll realize, what you'll come to realize if you pay careful attention to these things, really go for it as a practice, is that the world I actually perceive that I live in can either be, you know, if I practice a lot of unkindness and a lot of stinginess, I will perceive the world as a hostile place more and more. A cold, barren, hostile place I have to keep looking over my shoulder. I have to, there won't be a sense of the world is a lovely place full of love and warmth and actually somehow we're all one despite the appearances of separateness. The energy body will feel brittle and hard and separate and cold and all the rest of it. Yeah. So these are just everyday examples outside of meditation. What happens in meditation is you're taking some of those kinds of things and just cranking them up to a whole other level of power. Where the effects on perception of self, other world and all that just become way more, way more powerfully obvious. Does that make sense? So one way of understanding what actually holds everything in the Dharma together is that exploration. So we will return to this just because it's so important and as I said it's even more important when we get to the formless genres. But this whole shifts in perception with different ways of looking. The dependent arising of perception, the dependent arising of the world, dependent arising of the self. I need to see that loads of times and let it really impress on the chitta. So it's through repetition but also again through extending the degree of range of ways of looking, how many and also how powerful they are. So yeah we can think of that also as a teaching about karma. I practice this, I do this or I think this repeatedly or I view the world repeatedly and I will end up being reborn. I don't mean a thousand years from now. I mean now and ten minutes from now whatever. I will end up being reborn in a world that's colored a certain way and if I practice kindness and generosity and all the other lovely really good stuff I'm reborn in a world. It was the same world but actually it's very very different. So we need to, I'll talk about it again, we need to see that so many times and see it over so many different kinds of ways of looking and really make the connection. Actually I have to put this whole idea, I have to in a way load it in as a cartridge as the whole way I'm seeing practice and then follow through with it and then see what it does. If I don't do that it won't impress so deeply and I have to do that many many times through a range of different, differently variously powerful practice and a range of kinds of practice. Until we get it and the heart, the chitta get something really deeply and it's profoundly liberating and there's a mystical beauty and wonder that comes from that, from the kind of insight that comes from that. It's I would say an insight of a whole other level. So going back to something I said before, there's three things we can extract out here. So experientially and then then relate them to insight. Experientially one can have in the third jhana this sense of one taste, either in the meditation or outside, everything has this one taste. And so there is actually less duality, once one opens repeatedly to that experience, there's less duality between the jhana and the nadjhana or meditation and the rest of the world or even the jhanic realm and the rest of the world. One sees that actually that's the nature of the whole world. So there's less duality between a place I need to get to and the rest of the world because all of it has this one taste of peacefulness. Does that make sense? So that's a certain opening and perception that we can have that's very fruitful. We could call it, let's just stick the label on it for now, kind of non-dualistic between jhana and the world, let's say, the jhanic realm and the worldly realm. But sometimes we can have a much more dualistic sense of the jhanas. They are, and as a passage, I think it's in the Majjhima Nikaya, there's certainly more than one passage where the Buddha describes each jhana as an escape. Nisarana is the Pali. So they're realms of escape. So this lovely gorgeous realm of peacefulness is a realm of escape from the world. And he's actually describing Saraputta and meditating and I think it's Saraputta and he says, actually there's a better escape than the first jhana, the second jhana. That's a better escape than the first jhana. And then in the second jhana, after a certain time, there's a better escape. The third jhana is a better escape from the world than the second jhana, etc, etc, all the way through. Nisarana, now it's true that word can mean other things. It can mean things like just a sort of result or when something issues in something else, like a result or it can mean a flowing out. But it's also, it's related to what Nis means is a prefix that means out or outside and or going out and Sarana is a word you may know, Saranam, Buddang Saranam Gachami. What does that mean? Refuge or shelter. So a jhana as a refuge outside, outside of the world and experientially, I guess, there's that to me there is very much that thrust in the Buddha's teachings. Again, in the context of really looking at the Pali Canon and noticing how much he talks about jhana, how much he talks about not being reborn, etc. Let's not go there right now, but it can also mean leaving behind. But there's a case for he's really saying there's this escape from the world. And there's other escapes from the world. The first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth jhanas, etc. You could say and but there also in an escape then from the non peacefulness that characterizes the world. They're an escape from the non sukha that characterizes the body as it's usually experienced, and the mind as it's usually experienced, and the world as it's usually experienced. There's quite a dualistic teaching. And it points the way it or paves the way even each jhana is a step of or further escape, it paves the way for the total escape of the Arahant not to be reborn into this world. What I would like to say we've got this non dualistic teaching or this kind of non dualistic teaching, everything's all one taste, world and meditation. And then we've got this kind of dualistic teaching, meditation or jhana as escape from the world. And what I would like to stress is actually that we can have both of those as experiences and they're both very valid. And we shouldn't make a duality between duality and non duality. To me, that's really, really important because some of the most entrenched, unbudgable, dualistic thinking people I've met are call themselves non dual, non dualist. To me, that's actually really, really important. So both as experiences, both of these are blessings that we can enter this realm, you know, you know, I've been very sick and in a lot of pain. And and just to be able to go into a realm where there's none of that, there's no discomfort, there's, you know, it's really a blessing, and really a gift. But one can also have the other view, everything becomes that. So they're just views, they're just views that we can move between. What's the deeper view between what's the deeper than these two views is this third thing that we were talking about dependent arising, because dependent arising, when I really understand that it legitimizes and it opens the door for all kinds of different views, one can view dualistically, and one can view so called non dualistically, one understands this or that perception arises dependent, it's empty. And that gives me freedom, there's no perception of anything that is not empty. Since all perceptions are empty, in a way, there's not a hierarchy, there's not an intrinsic hierarchy. There's a hierarchy dependent on what I might want at any time. I might want to reduce suffering, but then okay, which way of reducing suffering right now helps the best. The hierarchy is not intrinsic, it's not, so to speak, ontologically intrinsic, but it might be practically, then one might hierarchize practically, so to speak. So realm of escape, in this case, from the usual realm, which is non peacefulness and non sukka, and that's the world, you know, and that's the world as we know it. So how does this peacefulness arise? How does it arise? Peacefulness arises from the quietening from the attenuating of the push and pull of the chitta in relationship to phenomena. We push away what we don't like, I prefer this thing to that thing, so I push that one away and or pull this one towards me, or I prefer this one, I don't want it to go away, so I keep pulling on it so it won't go away. Now we all know that happens at an extremely gross level, we literally don't leave me and pulling someone or whatever it is, or literally pushing something or someone away. But the amazing thing is it happens more subtly as well, and more subtly, and more subtly, and we can trace that investigation into more and more subtly, into more and more subtleness. Peacefulness arises from attenuating the degree of push and pull, and the degree of peacefulness will correspond to just how much push and pull we let go of. Equanimity also, which is a kind of peacefulness we'll come back to, arises from lessening the push and pull in the moment. I'm not talking about meditation, I'm not talking about ways of living. Equanimity also, which is a kind of peacefulness, arises from an attenuation of the mind's habitual moment to moment push and pull with experience. Does it make sense? Yeah. So, practically speaking, the question arises, how do we attenuate the push? Does everyone know what attenuate means? Reduce. How do we reduce? How do we dampen the push and pull? If dampening the push and pull gives such profound rewards, then I want to know, how do I dampen the push and pull? Well, in a way, drinking from the second jhana, drinking and drinking and drinking, as I described earlier, until satisfaction arises, in a way, that's dampening the push and pull, because satisfaction implies that I don't need to push and pull. If I'm satisfied, I don't need to change what's there. I don't need to pull this thing towards me. I don't need to push this thing away. I don't need to hang on to anything. I'm just satisfied. Does that make sense? So, drinking the second jhana is, you know, I don't know if it's official, the proximal cause of the third jhana, of the equanimity that the Buddha is talking about in the third jhana, that degree of equanimity. So, the equanimity that the Buddha is talking about in the third jhana is a little just side note now. It's related to that kind of peacefulness and the sense of being in a realm that's just free of disturbance and kind of undisturbable, or that the one taste has spread everywhere, and then it's just undisturbable. Undisturbable is another word for equanimity, or imperturbable, the Buddha sometimes uses that word, not perturbable. But one way that we might attenuate the push and pull is through just drinking and drinking from the second jhana. Another way, or actually a whole set of ways, a whole set of ways, is by deliberately practicing attenuating the push and pull. And this is actually almost any insight way of looking, what I call insight ways of looking. Any insight way of looking is basically doing that. And if it doesn't do that, it doesn't qualify for the name insight way of looking. So, there are loads of them, and some of them it's very obvious that's what I'm doing. For instance, some of you will know this if I'm working with what I call the second dukkha method, I'm actually feeling in to the sense of pushing away or grabbing on or holding on. I'm feeling in, in the energy body, in the mind, in the subtle awareness to any sense of contraction, push and pull, and then I'm relaxing it. And then I'm noticing another one, I'm relaxing it, noticing another one, relaxing it. So, it's very obvious that in a deliberate and sustained way, that's exactly what we're doing. And if we just keep doing that, a profound, lovely peacefulness will open up, because the push and pull is being attenuated. There's something else, something like, notice, practicing the view of anatta, of seeing phenomena as not-self, or practicing the view of seeing phenomena as impermanent anicca. It's not often immediately obvious to people that that's what we're doing, that when we see things as impermanent, moment to moment, arising, passing, effectively what we're doing, as well as obviously seeing the impermanence, the result in the moment of seeing the impermanence, not ten years later, but in the moment, not even a month later, in the moment, the result should be that because we see everything's flowing so fast, we just let go. We don't even have to think, oh, it's impermanent, therefore I should let go because I don't want to suffer a sense of loss. It just happens automatically. It's like if you, I don't know, if you try and probably pour an allergy coming up, but if you try and imagine sand just pouring and pouring, there's loads of the sand and you just are trying to catch it in a net that's just completely the wrong size meshing and it just falls, it just keeps falling through. If you keep trying to catch it in the net, you just haven't realized it's just impossible. So I don't have to think about that. I wonder, oh, maybe the holes are too big. It just is obvious. Similar thing, when we're practicing impermanence effectively what we're doing, and I really mean in the effect of what we're doing, is that we're attenuating the push and pull. And the same with an atar practice, actually the same with any of what I would call insight way of looking. It's a deliberate, a deliberate moment to moment sustained attenuating of the push and pull with all phenomena or just a certain set of phenomena that you've pre-circumscribed. So that's the second way. A third way is also going back to this other element we've already pinpointed, the one taste. If everything has one taste as its kind of most salient characteristic, I don't need, it's all the same. It's like I'm not going to choose this molecule of water over that molecule of water to drink. It's all just water. And so what's my reason for push and pull? So I'm not talking about living your life that way. That would be utterly, utterly stupid. But actually, some people then get the idea that Buddhists are supposed to sort of have that attitude to everything. And it's, anyway, I'm talking about a meditation practice that one does for a period of time for the sake of seeing what the results are because it's telling, A, it's opening up a beautiful resource and space, but B, it's going to tell me something about emptiness and dependent arising, which is the most liberating insight or range or realm of insight that I can have. But if I, in some way or other, practice perceiving things in my analysis with equality, there's equality. Everything is the same somehow. Either everything has the taste of love or it has the taste of this peacefulness, but everything is that. Then just that perception, there's no differentiation. There's nothing to hook any reason to push this away and pull that. Do you understand? Does that make sense? So that's another way. That's what one might practice in meditation. But in a way, most of that, there's second and third, the deliberately practicing attenuating the push and pull and the sort of one taste. In a way, they're sort of more insight practices. Primarily on this retreat, if we talk about how does the push pull get attenuated so that the peacefulness can arise, it's primarily through the second Jhana and the satisfaction that comes there. Okay. So same deal with the third Jhana with mastery and everything that we've been talking about that. The different elements of mastery, which you already know, and the issues of pacing. When is it the right time for me to play with trying some of that? When is it premature? Am I being too heavy with it? Or can I keep it very light and very much like a game? Now we've expanded our possibilities for leapfrog and ping pong. You can jump, let's say you've been in the third Jhana and you can jump to the first and the third and first. That's ping pong, first, third, first, third, but it's also leapfrog. So it's a leapfrog ping pong. Do you see? Or, you know, three, one, three, one, three, one, three, two, two, I don't know, but you get the idea. You start to move in any permutation and combination just at the end of sittings for fun to your exercising the malleability of ways of looking and it's an element of mastery. So including going out of any Jhana at all. Let's just go back to a kind of normal consciousness and then jump from there to the second or the third or whatever it is. So these are little games you can have in the last five or ten minutes if there's the batteries left. If there's energy, energy left. Okay, so let's stop there and have a bit of quiet together. Okay, thank you everybody. So, like I said, I'll move my interviews to seven. I try and be as on time as I can, but hopefully you can be just a little bit patient if that's not exact. So, okay, tea time, so enjoy tea.

 Okay, so we have appeared today for some questions. If there are any, I've got a couple, I think at least two written, and maybe just three little things I wanted to throw out, but are there any? I will get to all these things, including the written questions, but maybe just start with an oral one. There is one. Correct me if I'm wrong. I don't recall you actually describing the way one might practice with the ringing in the ears as a concentration practice, did you? Or could you? I can, I didn't, deliberately I didn't. The reason I deliberately didn't is because the more you pay attention to it, the more prominent it becomes, and the more sort of sustained it becomes. And it's possible further on down the line that you decide that you don't want it to be prominent and sustained. So I feel a little tentative about giving that as an instruction. So there's, I guess there's three ways you could relate to it. One is, it's just, one is, and actually four ways, one is this is actually tinnitus, and I don't know, is there a medical solution for tinnitus? What's that? Ignoring it, which is what I was going to say as a Dharma Sish. Not so much ignoring it as not getting into a fight with it. So one option is, in other words, that either whether it's tinnitus or it's just the ringing in the ears, the sound that comes up as the mind gets still and energized for some people, and you decide this isn't something I'm particularly interested in, I don't really want to work with it meditatively. I know that's not what you're asking, I'm just, I want to give a teaching, yeah. So if that's the case, then the best attitude to it is I'm not really paying attention, and the most important thing is not to get into an aversive relationship with it. So what I'm really watching is my aversion in relationship to it. It's just like, it's just some noise happening. It doesn't mean anything about me, it doesn't, if I, if I, you know, fight, I get to this more when we talk about more about emptiness and dependent arising, if I get into an aversive relationship with it, I make it unpleasant. I will perceive that sound as unpleasant, and then that unpleasantness triggers more aversion if I'm not careful, and it's perceived as more unpleasant, and the whole thing cycles around just because of dependent arising, because there was even just a little bit of aversion at the beginning that I wasn't taking care of. Do you understand that, Luke? Okay, it happens with any object of perception. There it is, and I add some, I'm in an aversive relation, even a subtly aversive relationship to it. It cannot help but color and shape and form the object of perception, in this case the internal sound, and it colors and shapes and forms it negatively. It becomes more unpleasant. Then usually, again, without mindfulness, without care, without skillful relationship, in the moment what's more unpleasant just triggers more aversion, and the whole thing loops around, and that can become eventually as maddening as it is for people who really don't like their tinnitus. Whether it's organic in origin, let's say that it's actually tinnitus if there is such a thing, or whether it's this thing, but if I decide that I'm not really picking it up as an object, then I really need to be just watch that aversion. In terms of, so that's one thing, if I'm not really interested in it. If I am really interested in it, again, with the caution, the reason I didn't put it out was because one might change one's mind, and then one's, I explored it for a while, it doesn't come up that much anymore. In other words, enough time has gone by, it got prominent, it got the whole thing, but enough time went by that I just wasn't that interested in it, I didn't get aversive, and the whole thing died down. If one did decide, okay, I'm at least willing to experiment with it, then basically, they're two, broadly speaking, they're two ways. One is with using it as a kind of concentration object. That's actually, that would be the base practice, that would be the primary thing that you're paying attention to, but it's a sound. When you get distracted, that's what you return to. As with all, if we were working with the breath here, again, it's like, can I get really intimate with it? Can I really listen in a very fine way? Do I need to play with the delicacy of my listening, the intensity of my listening, all that stuff? It's the same kind of thing. What often happens for people who choose that as an object is that as they listen more carefully, or it might be obvious from the beginning, is that it begins to reveal that it's actually not so much a spectrum as a collection of frequencies. In other words, there's a lower one, there's a higher one, there's stuff in the middle, and maybe they're slightly different. You can begin to discern, it's almost like listening under a magnifying glass, so to speak. Listening's individual, but it often is the case that listening to the higher-pitched one will bring more energy into the being. Everyone's individual, but find the highest pitch in this kind of chord. If you like the highest pitch in the chord, that's what you listen to. That brings more energy, and is, if you like, a more refined object. We were talking about the refinement with the jhanas and that kind of business. It's similar to that. It's a refined object, partly because in a way a higher-pitched sound in terms of physics is a more refined object. What can then happen, if you tune into that higher pitch, the higher pitch, the higher pitch, and probably again the background of the whole thing with the body. You really want to include the body as a bit like the instructions we gave to Julian. If I paid attention to my upper lip here with the breath, I still want the body in the background. Eventually what will happen with the sound or with the body is the body just gets integrated into, in this case, into the listening. One is listening with the body. Some people can start that already because they're familiar with listening with the body, but at some point just by including the body in the background awareness, this sound is the foreground, the higher pitch is the foreground, background awareness, it starts to integrate. The connection between that and PT in the whole energy body, etc., can go. What happens is this higher pitch, I've been paying attention to it, maybe that after a little while that starts to split into a chord. It was perceived as one pitch and then it becomes a chord. Again, you can go to the highest one. That's a method. For some people it's really, really helpful for the samaari. But again, not to get confused what the primary nimitta is once the jhanic factors arise. It might be that some people listen to that and they listen to that and that's the object and they're really, really steady and very focused and very concentrated, but they're not getting so much into the PT or the sukkah or the whatever. In this way of teaching that we're exploring on this retreat, once the PT or sukkah or whatever it is comes up and it's very constant enough, it's strong enough to work with, it's definitely pleasant, then that becomes the primary. Then the sound is a bit like the breath in the energy body. Is there a way that it helps it? Probably is because energy body, in energetic terms, which remember is completely an illusion, is a relative truth, but in energetic terms, in that language, energy body, we're talking about vibrations. When I say listen to the... When I say pay attention to the energy body, I say frequencies, vibration, tone. This is all musical language, a tone as a note, a frequency, a vibration, that's all music. It could be that the energy body and the sound are just mutually vibrating like that and that's what allows the whole thing to grow in the samadhi direction, if that's what I want. There's another way of using it, which is more... Some people use it as a kind of insight practice, so then it becomes less an object of concentration in itself and more a kind of backdrop for... That relativizes the arising and passing of other phenomena. In other words, this sound feels like it's going on forever and it's just there, even though it's a bit like when I talked about a vastness of awareness. In fact, they're very parallel practices, so this sound feels like people who really get into it give it a kind of cosmic significance, like it's the primordial sound of the universe or whatever. The concepts and views wrapped up in that are that it's eternal, it eternally pervades the whole universe forever, maybe even from before the beginning, before the end of the universe, it's just there. My ability to hear at any time might come and go. That's actually really important. Is it an ultimate truth? I would say absolutely not, but it can be a really important stepping stone in terms of insight. If I just... I have this sense of it as constant, eternal, not in the transcending time sense, but as in lasting forever, and I have that sense of it, then anything else that comes up, any other sounds, the birds, the heating noise, the voice, any other sensations, the pain in the back, whatever it is, taste, smells, touches, thoughts, all of that, is all kind of given a constant backdrop with which to kind of offset its relative impermanence and the fact that it's just coming and going and this thing just stays. Do you understand? Does this make sense? That's very similar to what people get into with the vastness of awareness. What that does, because you've got something that's constant and you've got a little bit of a... I haven't got the view this is an irritating, tinnitus sound. I've got the view this is something mystically lasting forever, et cetera, and it pervades the whole universe. So it's less a thing that you're doing that to, more a thing you're kind of... it's a backdrop. And that enables one, if it's working well, to let go in relation to the phenomena, sight, sound, smells, taste, touches, and thoughts that arise impermanently, arise past, arise against the backdrop of that eternal... I use eternal as time, of that forever lasting. Does that make sense? So that would be a way of using it as an insight practice. And some people, either way, can be really, really powerful. The reason I didn't was because of what I said, because some people end up just really getting irritated by it and then kind of feel a little bit stuck with it and don't realize that then you actually have to work with the aversion to unstick yourself if you change your mind. But, yeah, for a lot of people, very, very profound. The question I would still have, let's say, for an insight meditator doing it that second way that I described is, great, and then how are you going to transcend that? How are you going to go beyond it? No, I'm asking anyone who does that for a long time and gets a lot of fruit out of it. And a long time means probably months. I know people who've been doing that for decades, but I don't know anyone who's gone beyond it. And so not to say you can't, it's just that the how becomes a real question. In other words, I might have set up my whole view of practice and goal. Through that practice, it comes with sort of views that are conscious and semi-conscious. And through all that, I might have set up my idea of what practice is and what the goal of practice is in a way that actually doesn't permit me to go beyond it. So it's just a question. I'm not saying it's impossible, of course it's not impossible, but it would take a whole kind of reworking. In that system, there's nothing that's kind of integrated into that view that you can rely on, that in time will go beyond that. It's rather you'd have to actually then re-examine the whole view and do something really quite different probably. Whereas there's other ways of insight practice that I would like to talk about on this retreat that have within them, actually you just keep doing the same thing. Not the same practice, but the same principle. And it just goes beyond, beyond, beyond wherever you are, beyond, beyond, beyond. It'll eat up everything. But that's a whole other subject. So different possibilities. Yeah? Okay. Good. Is that Nick? Yeah. Oh, yes. Thank you. Yeah, an exploration has kind of opened up in the last couple of days around the spectrum of subtlety to intensity of experience. So experience of the energy body and in the energy body and of the nematas. And I think, you know, I feel like I've done most of that work within a soul-making context. And I don't know, within that context, I feel really confident about working with subtle energy body experiences, especially when there's image present as well. But I kind of realized, I was finding here, that because there's this map and there's more like universal things that we're after and kind of trying to tap into, or these realms that we're trying to tap into and experience, I began to get really confused about what is subtle and what's intense and whether subtlety actually has some near enemies. Like because I had two really strong PT experiences, two sits, and then I had one which I couldn't, it was much, much less intense. It was much gentler and softer. And I wasn't sure. There was some doubt around, is this subtle PT or is it blocked or is it hindered in some way? And then there's, you know, you gave the image of the glowing ember and then like fanning that a little bit to get the flames going. And it seems obvious that the ember is the subtle thing and the flames are the intense thing, but you can also have a really intense feeling of a glowing ember and subtle feeling of flames. And so, yeah, I've just been thinking a lot about it and I might be making too much of it, but it seems like quite an important thing to, I don't know, to feel into and to tune into a bit more, to be more confident. Like does something, does equality, do you need to experience equality really intensely before you can know it in its subtle aspects? For example, that's one question. Okay, yeah, so let me give a response and see if it addresses what you're asking Nick. So I think the problem is with the word subtlety, which I've been conscious of in myself when I use it, that actually it's a, what's it, when a word has at least three meanings, not ambiguous, but try, try, try give us. Anyway, it's confusing potentially. So we can talk about the intensity of the PT, how strong it feels, and that's an element of sassy, right? The eye. And that I said doesn't matter. It only matters that it's definitely pleasant, okay? Over the course of, if you really get into Jhana practice, you probably experience PT, you know, over that whole range. And basically the point of the sassy is that I don't need to worry about that too much. As long as it's relatively pleasant, I don't need to worry about it. If it's so pleasant that actually I'm really struggling with opening to that and it's kind of almost uncomfortably pleasant, then I may need to work in different ways with that. But generally speaking, I don't need to worry. And over time, and by over time, I mean, so initially with Jhana practice, you'll notice so it, depending on how you've, again, depending whether you've gone via the ember and the energy body and fanning it or via the nostrils, generally you'll just notice there's a variation from formal session to formal session of the strength of the PT, of the intensity of the PT, and it doesn't matter. Over much more time, you'll realize that, you know, once you've got second, third, Jhana, fourth, Jhana, once all that, you actually, you'll realize that there has been gradually in a kind of not very uniformly linear way. There's been a kind of lessening of the intensity of the PT over time. Yeah? So that's just in terms of the strength of it. But then we can also talk about subtlety and intensity of attention. And you know, even I would even separate, those even mean the same thing. In other words, what is it to pay, what is it to just, this is quite a hard thing to communicate if one hasn't really experienced, well, what is it to turn up the intensity of the attention on something? You know? So as you say, you could have a very subtle object, but you're paying attention to it very intensely. Absolutely. Yeah? And you could have a very subtle object, maybe in different ways, you know? Does that make sense? And then a third word that gets mixed in here is refinement. So you know, so as we go through the Jhanas, what happens is also, as I said, each Jhana is more refined than the other. So all these, you know, subtlety is not quite the same thing as refinement. Subtlety of attention certainly is, it's almost like there's three different, at least three different words that could get confused there. Subtlety intensity and refinement. And then you've got of the attention and of the perceived object. You know, so there's all kinds of, we could be talking about quite a few different things here. Are we talking about the attention? Are we talking about the nimitta? And are we talking about its subtlety, its refinement, or its intensity, or what? Yeah? Maybe subtlety and in some circumstances subtlety and intensity would just be flips of each other. Yeah. This is not quite hitting the nail on the head. Well again, it's like if you come back so often, you know, if you come back to the big picture, what am I actually trying to do here? In soul making practice, we're not necessarily after more intensity of anything particularly, but what we are after is the development of sensitivity. And so part of what, part of really opening to an image and working well with it might be just do I have right now the art and skill and capacity to notice, do I have enough sensitivity to notice the different soul resonances and energetic resonances, etc. So all you're really doing is part of like can I tune to it, you know? And there's no, it's just what's there and what does it need and what can I notice, you know? And with the Samadhi practice, you know, it's more what does it need in order to get more into this and for it to either feel better or for me to just feel like I'm really, really into it now. You understand? So that's why, for example, the eye in sassy, the intensity, it doesn't actually matter. What matters is how I'm relating to it. Yeah, but I've got if I've got in my mind, I know where I'm going. What I want is to really get into an experience that's pleasant or to help it move to the next level. But that would only be at certain times, you know, once it's really matured and it's ready to ripen. You understand? So just as a general thing, if you can get used to this sort of like big picture, where am I going in this practice? What's the sort of, do you understand what I'm saying? That helps me, helps guide me in the moment at times when you won't have a teacher to ask. I can think about what where is this practice going in and that the larger hierarchy view informs the middle hierarchy, which informs this moment where I am, why emphasizing my attention, why, why attuned to what I amplify through my attunement, etc. Does that make sense? So like for a beginner, so I'm just, you know, just getting into working with the PT. The sort of primary rather than sort of worrying about is, is this subtle PT or is it hindered or is it blocked in some way? If I ask the question, how do I make this feel better? How do I increase the well being? Going in that way rather than worrying about whether this is subtle or intense or. Yeah, absolutely. Subtle and intense doesn't matter. It's just is it is it definitely pleasant and know that it will move across the range? Is it blocked or hindered is a different question. So it was not like, oh, it's not so strong in this session. Then I start to wonder, am I blocking or hindering it? No. If it's blocked or hindered, you will feel that as a block or it will feel uncomfortable. It will feel like it's stuck somewhere or it's kind of the pain in the body or something like that. So that's I wouldn't worry about that. But what you can always ask is is what you just can I can I get into it more? Can I enjoy it more? Which doesn't equate to can I make it stronger? Can I get into it more? Can I enjoy it more? Might and should include playing with the intensity of the attention, the delicacy of the attention, different modes of attention. Am I opening? Am I going into it? Am I wrapping myself in it? You know, all this stuff. Yeah. So. But again, as a general principle, it's really helpful to think backwards. This is this is oftentimes what's so missing in people's dharma practice or it's common for it to be missing is that one hasn't sort of thought. I haven't really clear about where I'm what the kind of aim is of this or that practice and then how everything acts to support that aim. We end up actually being quite unsure at any moment what to do or unfortunately, because we've heard so and so say that and so and so say that we end up emphasizing something that doesn't fit into or is a confusing paradigms or whatever. You know, does that make sense? So yeah, it's really important. Yeah, that's good. So I've got a couple of written ones. Sure. Today, I had a very strange meditation experience. I was doing formal sitting. Oops. Let's do one. I was doing formal sitting. Practice outdoors on a chair under my favorite tree. I was aiming at exploring the rooms close to the first and second jhana. I had played with the nada sound. That's that sound that Jason was just talking about that played with the nada sound and slash current and played with connecting it connecting the sound and my left foot. I had moved on to metta as a springboard and felt the warmth and happiness and well-being of giving metta. There was also in the scene, there was also the nada and light. So even though she was doing metta, there was still the sound and this light, these secondary nematas. Just going back to the nada sound, it can arise for people as a secondary nemata, an indication that their practice is deepening in terms of samadhi. I was working and playing with expanding and enjoying that too. Then I sensed as though something was moving under my right foot. I had heavy trekking boots on. This felt very surprising and strange and caught my attention. After a short while, about five or 10 seconds, it seemed, I'm not sure, that subsided and instead I felt something trying to push my left foot up from the ground as if it were in the way. I experienced this as very strange. First I wondered if the hard wind might be moving a branch on which maybe my foot was resting. The sensation continued and I opened my eyes and saw my left foot almost rhythmically in pace with the sensation from my foot. I lifted my foot and boot but there was nothing. No branch that could have been moved by the wind, no animal, no hole in the ground, only small, small pieces of branches, leaves and soil and mud. I perceived this as very strange. I put my foot back and went back to my intended practice meditating in the playground of foothills of the first Jhana. To my surprise, the sensation of something trying to lift my left boot reappeared soon. This was scary. Was an animal trying to break into my boot or wanting to get it out of its way? Question. Mark. Again, I opened my eyes, lifted my boot and looked carefully. I even poked around with a stick. Nothing. I'm really puzzled. Can you help me understand what might have been going on? I would really appreciate that. Okey-doke. I don't think this is that common. I can say that I experienced something like that. In certain meditative states, maybe less in the deeper Jhanas but certainly around the first that sort of territory as you describe the rooms, the foothills around it. The energy, the PT is opening the body and one of the ways it opens the body for me is my heels come off the ground. It's really not a big deal. They just slowly come off the ground. I mentioned this thing about the head tilting back. I don't know. Does anyone else have anyone else? No? Maybe it's just me and you. I'm okay with that. It doesn't bother me at all. I'm experiencing it and I'm pretty sure it's just a movement, an expansion of the PT actually expanding the physical body much the same way that the head tilting slightly back is. It disappears as somebody gets deeper beyond the first Jhana territory and even in the first Jhana it tends to quieten down I think. That's how I perceive it. I guess it could move the other way. The feet could go to the side or the toes go up or whatever but it's really just an energetic phenomenon. It's not at all weird, nothing at all to worry about. I suppose probably if I look back very, very low down the list of my, oh maybe I should have done something slightly differently. Maybe I should have tried to keep more still but it's so not an issue for me. How does that sound? Just a couple of other things and this is for everyone. When you've got a lot of secondary nimiters and things going on, again, really make sure what the primary one is. Then these are all secondary and to the degree that I can mix them in that it really feels like they're supportive rather than pulling the attention in different directions. That's good. We can do all kinds of things with our sense of body anatomy. What did you start with? Connecting the nada sound, connecting it with my left foot. You can do all kinds of things like that. The movement of where we're going is such that at some point in the jhanas, for some people very quite early on, the whole body shape dissolves from consciousness. In a way, we want to make sure that we're not perpetuating that beyond where it's useful. Does that make sense? These are just things to check. I think really nothing to worry about and very normal. Before I forget, my interviews again will move to 7 o'clock, so that's an hour earlier, whatever your time is. Please come an hour earlier. We probably will finish in the next half hour, but if we don't, then how should we do that? Just have a brief word when we finish and decide between the two of you. Thanks. Thank you, Lauren. Great. Got another note here, if there's nothing else right now. Working with pleasure, joy, love, etc. brings up a lot of guilt and a little sadness and even pain. Am I allowed to be happy and live my life joyfully if someone is suffering? Does my happiness cause suffering in someone else? I can sense the PT, the joy, etc. underneath something that feels like holding back and guilt. I want the joy and happiness so badly, but I also feel very sad that other people suffer and maybe even suffer because of me and don't allow themselves to live their life or don't have the conditions to do so, race, social status, etc. I feel I need to suffer joyfully with them. Sorry, I'm not sure where the joyfully goes. Don't allow themselves to live their life joyfully. Maybe this is not signed, so I'm not sure. Don't allow themselves to live their life joyfully. Perhaps it goes there. Or don't have the conditions to do so, race or social status, etc. I feel I need to suffer with them to show some allegiance and solidarity. Focusing on that guilt and sadness, etc. takes me away from the PT. Again, a habit that is there for too long now. Not focusing on it seems as no one would hold that pain and it feels as if the pain wants to be held. This is quite important. It's actually quite common, is partly what I want to say. This kind of thing I have heard a lot, relatively quite a lot from students over the years. Does my happiness cause suffering in someone else? It might, but it might in two ways. If you talk unkindly to someone, then your happiness in Jhana doesn't cause suffering to someone else. They might and maybe people experience it. I want to go away on retreat for this long and my family or friends are saying, I'll really miss you, it will be difficult without you, etc. Hard, tricky. Technically speaking, it doesn't cause the suffering that alone. Or if I say I really want to do this, X or Y is really important to me. I need to devote myself to this project and therefore I can't have time for this or that person right now. Does that decision cause their suffering or if they're suffering over it, is their suffering then dependent on a lot of conditions? Partly what their psychological propensity is, what their background is, what the agreement in our relationship is, other conditions, the way they're relating to their suffering. This is quite important, this word cause. Sometimes it's much more helpful to think about the coming together of conditions that gives rise to suffering or the coming together of conditions that gives rise to happiness or whatever. What happens is we get very easily, we say, a person says, you made me suffer. In some instances that's actually a really healthy view. If I rob someone or I'm inappropriately angry at them or whatever, yeah, maybe I'll punch them or whatever, yeah, maybe definitely. We can think very helpfully about a one-to-one causal relationship. But in many situations, what's actually happening is a person is suffering and that suffering that they're experiencing this moment has all kinds of conditions, often over many years of what's been cultivated as psychological habit or what's been cultivated in their history or in the agreements of your relationship, etc. Or a non-clarity about relationships or the absence of a conversation about needs and supporting each other to have different needs, etc. I don't know exactly what the example is here, but I would caution about that, about one's own happiness causing suffering. And yes, if I choose X, it may mean, or there's certain things in life that if I choose them, it effectively means I cannot choose Y or I have to postpone Y. And we really, really need to understand this. Sometimes you get it in, or if we amplify the whole question to an ethical question. So even this thing about flying, a lot of people have heard me go on and on and on about that we fly too easily these days and with the carbon emissions. But maybe someone is making an ethical choice between X and Y and they're weighing up or they're trying to weigh up for themselves what's the most ethical, virtuous thing to do. But in making this choice, I can't do this. So either I go and whatever it is, my grandmother is dying and she needs a nurse and whatever, and I've got the time and I'm happy and we have a good relationship. If I go, I can't not fly. If I not fly, I can't go. There's a million examples. Every day, little examples, and through our life, lots of big examples. You cannot avoid, we cannot as human beings avoid those kinds of choices. And with the best conscience and best kind of sensitivity and listening that we can muster, we have to choose. But we will always be choosing in some ways what we could call a moral shortcoming, an ethical shortcoming, and some kind of suffering may come out of that. So this is just part of what it means to be a human being and we have to recognize this, acknowledge it, open to it, and deal with it. Someone somewhere is going to get disappointed at some point with our choices. But the question is, what's navigating me and how am I relating to that? That's a whole question. But there's a lot in this note. Let's say I devote my life to serving others, to alleviating suffering in the world. I still have to make particular choices within that. I cannot possibly address the whole of the suffering in the whole world. So maybe I work in human rights or maybe I work in racial injustice, whatever it is. In doing that, again, in order to give my energy to that, I'm neglecting something else. And let's say I choose one. I have to be conscious of this. I cannot possibly help everyone's suffering at the same time. But even then, let's say I've chosen something, I'm aware of this, okay, I have to choose and that's at the cost of something else, of not doing something else. I still have to, I give all my dedication, it's my job, whatever, but even my job, half of my money I give back into that organization. I just live on the bare minimum. I'm still going to need to sleep and eat and rest. And in a way, what we're doing, get nourished. Get it nourished. In a way, what we're doing with Jhana practice particularly is really taking the time on a retreat like this to develop really deep sources of rest and nourishment. So that, and I've mentioned this a few times, but not so directly, so that we can move out into the world if we want to and be that much more resourced. One can stay with this service work in hard conditions, in conditions that are not in themselves very supportive or very nourishing that might be quite difficult. One can stay steady with the flack and the eight worldly conditions, praise, blame, etc. that are there. One can keep doing that and stay, one has those resources accessible to one. So if you didn't, and you say, I'm going to try and help. I'm going to go somewhere and help in a refugee camp or whatever, and I decide to do it without sleeping and eating. How sustainable is it going to be? So it's similar to that. If we want to really kind of make our capacity and the possibility of our service very stable, very far reaching, it's like we can stay steady. We have the capacity. We can keep showing up. We have the energy. We have the flexibility. We have the bigness of heart that can be close to really difficult dukkha, and something in the heart has grown large, and partly it grows large through jhana practice. So all that, there's still that kind of question to kind of again understand what are we doing, what's the context of what we're doing here. Again, I don't know how often, but it is really quite common that I have heard this kind of question quite a lot over the years. Oftentimes it's just asking for a more thorough and careful, loving psychological inquiry into what's going on there for oneself, because it might be we've been educated in a certain way to believe certain things that it's not, as I said, around the first and second jhana. A lot of this comes up. Is it okay to experience this much pleasure, but also is it okay, just this, is it okay to feel this happy when other people are not? So this is very, very common. And yeah, there might be all kinds of views that have been implanted in there socially, culturally, from the family, whatever. Just in terms of the last thing in the note, I think it's quite important, you know, focus, so there's already a recognition in this note, there's already recognition, focusing on that guilt and sadness, etc., takes me away from the PT again. And the person who's written this has written, it's a habit that's been there for too long now. So there's already a recognition, and there's something else going on here that needs some investigation. Not focusing on it, not focusing on the sadness and the suffering in the world seems as if no one would hold that pain, and it feels as if the pain wants to be held. So again, if we're talking about world suffering or social injustice, I think, I don't know, you know, I think we need to be clear that I'm not the only person in the world caring for this issue. And sometimes the mind just gets squeezed into sort of semi-conscious beliefs that obviously don't make sense. There are other people working on this. I can afford to take a rest for a few weeks to do a retreat, or I can afford to sit for half an hour in the morning or two hours a day or whatever. It's not really going to mean that that suffering is not attended to or goes unheld in the world. If it's, for instance, there's one person that I know in my life, and it really seems like they're isolated and they have no one but me to, you know, to have a sense of holding with. I think, you know, that needs a larger conversation and a larger look at the situation and their situation and our relationship, etc., and what can be brought in there because that's also maybe, it's obviously not that helpful for them, and it may not be that helpful for me. So, but again, I don't know the details here, and the person hasn't signed it, but I hope that that's at least something to this kind of thing. It's very, very common, so I'm glad, I'm glad I don't know. It's really common, especially around this territory with the PT and the Sukkah, given, I think, some of how we've been educated in our culture. Okay. I wanted to just throw a few things out there, and then we'll see if there are any more. Are there any more questions? Live as well? Yeah. Please. Yeah, please with the mic. Yeah, thanks. I started to, can you hear me? You need to hold it right near your mouth. Yeah? Yeah. I started to practice the walking around, walking around on everything, and it was really lovely. I was really pleased that it opened up and it was very beautiful. And it got into a space where it was kind of like I've had before when I've done metta and also in soul making practices where it feels like everything has that quality where I'm walking around the space like that. And I was just wondering, one, is that what it's supposed to be like? And two, I was also wondering, I guess it feels like focusing on that nimitta and then sassing it up. That kind of happens. I like that. I wondered, can you do that with any object that is kind of like an open-hearted well-being kind of object? Because I've done it with metta. I mean, I haven't done a yen and soul making practice, but I've never practiced things like brahman bahara or anything else. So let's do the first question first. First question first. So walking around and with this primary nimitta quality goes very well. And then you notice that basically everything is perceived almost as that nimitta or as if it's a manifestation. Very normal, very glad that it happened. It's extremely important, extremely important. And I'll come back to it later. But basically, it's the dependent arising of perception. And it has everything to do with the emptiness. If I experience this, let's say I experience, we could choose any quality, but let's say I experience it with something like metta. Let's say I experience the first thing, oh, metta is from me and I do it and I sort of crank it round and round. Then at a certain point, it begins to come out of me to another person or all beings. Then I begin to experience another sense where the universe is metta or the universe is made of metta or everything shines that forth or that's its real substance or whatever. If I experience that, I don't know, three times or five times, it will be nice. You know, it will be a nice experience. If I experience it, I don't know, 500 times and I'm really going back and forth between that perception of the world and our usual perception of the world in Western culture, which is of course the world is not love. Of course, of course this glass is not love. It's made of whatever the chemical composition of glass is and then there's the water and that's the reality. Of course, a being is made up of their molecules and they're not love or form of love or spark of love. If I really start going in and out and experiencing a lot, a lot, a lot, the very going in and out of it starts to relativize or dislodge this entrenched view about that's really reality and this is just a nice experience that I'm having occasionally. And it's really start to, A, wonder, well, which is real? Some people then go to, okay, the love is the real one. But again, the question is, okay, it's really, really good to live there and hang out there and even have that view perhaps for a long time. But at some point, I'm going to want to even go beyond that and realize something about the emptiness of perception, the dependent arising of perception. So we'll get more and more into, I may even speak about it again tomorrow, but as you get more into the later Jhana, this becomes really, really an important element, I would say, of what is significant in Jhana practice. Again, we're back to this question, what's actually significant, what's less significant? And this, for me, turns out to be extremely significant and beautiful and lovely. So is that enough for now? And it's a theme that we'll come back to at least once, I think. There was just a second question. Yeah, so, okay. So, can I sassy up any quality is the question? Well there may be ones that I could, but I'm not going to enjoy it, so that E at the end, like hatred, well actually hatred for something can be enjoyable to a certain degree for some time, but there's probably ones, self-hatred, it's probably not something I can get into and really enjoy. So the E at the end won't be possible, for example. But in terms of skillful quality, what the Buddha would call kusala, skillful qualities, wholesome qualities, I want to say, yeah, probably, probably. One of the things that can happen in soul making practice is different kinds of spaces open up, and then one can absorb into them more or less, and there's just an infinite amount. So my initial response is yeah, probably, but in a way on this retreat we're kind of, again, what's the primary nimitta, what's the primary thing that we're doing that with? Okay. Let me just, there was a few little things I wanted to just throw out. I think two of them are, well, they all refer to things I've said before, but maybe just say them slightly differently and they may help them to land a bit better. One is with the second jhana, I actually can't remember if I said this when we talked about the second jhana. So with the sukha, that's the primary nimitta of the second jhana, we really want eventually to experience that whole range of sukha, really the whole range. So it can get very, very sort of ecstatically happy, bubbly, laughing, et cetera, on one extreme. And on the other extreme it can get very, very serene, very, it's nowhere near laughter, there's not much bubbles in it, et cetera, and everything in between. And as I said, maybe even with love, without love, that's a bit secondary. But we want to really know that whole range, that whole territory. That's what I said about getting familiar with the jhana, when we take the time to marinate and master it. It's like really, I used to say to people, it's like knowing the library at Gahail, so you use that example because I spent so many hours in there doing interviews, but it's like you can put your head in the room and say, hey, it's a library, it's got books in it, and then close the door. Or you can really know every square inch, and it's a big room, and it's got lots of complexity, and there's this little bit on the carpet here, and there's this little angle where the windows meet the wall, and there's this bit of a bookcase there that's chipped or whatever. You can really, really know a place, a territory or not. So we want to know the whole range, we want to be comfortable, actually. This is more what I wanted to say. We want to be comfortable with that whole range and enjoy that whole range, all of it. So we need to get to a place where the whole range is really comfortable for us and enjoyable, and we know and feel its value of the whole range. Every place on that range, we want to feel like, I love this, I love this. It's like asking a musician or a chef or someone who's really into something, like, what's your favorite food or what's your favorite piece of music? Someone who's really into something is not going to give you one answer. They're going to be like, okay, I can narrow it down to 10 or something. It's the same thing with the bandwidth of happiness. It's like, oh, I love that, but I also love this. I love the bubbly, but I also love the really serene one, and that bit in the middle is pretty nice too. So we really want to be comfortable with the whole range, enjoy the whole range, know and feel its value, and let it do its, this is part of letting it do its work on the being, on the heart, on the soul, and also on the body. Marinating with the sense of loving and enjoying and opening, etc., it does work. It does work on the being. It does work on the heart. So what's of course common for probably any human being is that certain emotions are more frequently gravitated to, or of the whole emotional spectrum that a human being can have, there's certain ones that a certain personality tends to gravitate towards this kind of thing, and tends maybe, relative speaking, to avoid more of the other ones. So some people gravitate towards a subtle kind of, well, whatever it is, it could be anything. But oftentimes, for example, one might find that avoiding the really bubbly happiness, it's just not as part, so we're now talking about psychology and what's an energetic makeup. That's my propensity, my habit of my psychology, and part of the power of Jhana practices is, again, is to open all that up and really have the whole thing available to us. That's part, if you ask me, what does it mean to be a free human being? Part of it, to me, means having the whole range, having the whole range, the whole playground, the whole delicious range, including the really difficult. I can experience really hard grief and grieve with the world, and I can experience this incredibly bubbly, giggling, laughter-like thing, and there's no either-or. There's an either-or in the same moment, but one is free, and one's not scared of any of that or holding back. One's letting all that range work on the heart, work on the soul, work on the beings. It ends up being wide, having that range and that freedom. That was one thing. The question is, is that also true with PT? That's a good question. I don't know. I think I would be, as a teacher, I would be less insistent about that with the PT than with the happiness, because I'm not sure if experiencing the really intense... Let's turn it around. What I am sure about is experiencing subtle PT, going a little back to Nick's question, that that's important for everyone, that one needs to actually be able to even notice it and tune to it and be able to enjoy it. Why? Because I don't want to be always having really super strong and then not be able to notice something that's more subtle, not be able to tune to it and turn my nose up at it, because that's that same negative, it's not good enough thing. The subtle end of PT, I would say everyone needs to. With the stronger end, I'm just not sure. I don't know what the answer is. I feel less inclined to insist on that. I don't know, but it may be that that too... I think it's a personal thing. I think... This is just my opinion now. If I step back from that particular question and again, I think about human freedom, et cetera, and what it means to be liberated, I do feel... I think I've said it in here on this retreat just very briefly. I do feel that sometimes certain people may be holding their energy in or holding it back habitually, so that they're a little bit not allowing things to build up. Oftentimes they don't even know that. It's just so familiar as a psychological energetic... I'm not just talking about in meditation, I'm talking about in the whole life, so that for them to really open and surrender, or really even to have a lot of energy, it's like it's just a territory that they don't go towards, or they don't allow... happen. They don't know that they're not allowing it by this subtle holding. It's very, very subtle how that can get blocked. Sometimes for some people, I feel like... Again, I mentioned someone who's actually convinced that what she needs is to focus more. My opinion is actually what she needs is to learn to let energy build and to open it more. Does that mean that she needs the super intense PT? I don't know, but it seems to me psychologically, knowing over some years that that's actually something that... I would feel a bit tentative about saying that about the PT in general, like for everyone, or in terms of the PT. Does this make sense? For me, with the intense end of the PT, I think it would be more an individual question for me as a teacher. We would kind of sense... For these kinds of things, it's also a matter of like, is it the right time to even bring this up with a student? At the moment, is it like, well, there's nothing they're going to be able to do with it anyway, and it's probably only going to bring self... There's all kinds of factors involved, and also what they want, because at the end of the day, it's what they want. It's also their vision of awakening. If a view and vision of awakening is of a sort of... Actually, what awakened people look like and what they act like is very, very even and equanimous, and they don't show big eruptions of emotion, and they don't kind of experience those, but they're sort of more mature. If one has that whole view, and again, it can be semi-conscious, it can be a teaching that's verbally delivered, or just one has, I've just seen that over and over, whoever the eye is, in the Buddhist world with people who are supposed to be respected. I assume that's how a seasoned practitioner comports themselves, and that's their range, et cetera. If a person is actually... That's their view of awakening, and it's sort of, no, that's what I want. I want to be like that. It's up to them. It's their life and their emotions and their body. It's not up to me, unless they really say to me, which is very rare for a student to say to me, tell me everything you think, or what do you want. I've only had one person who said that to me, I think. Robert. It's very, very rare, which I hope you still don't regret. It's also, you have to respect, as a teacher, you have to respect people's choices and their views. In talks, this is a way longer answer than you want to, but in Dharma talks, I do find myself kind of shaking up those whole views. Is that what awakening is? Are you unconsciously thinking of it look like this? One to one, as a teacher, I tend to be very unpushy and very much like, what does this person want? What's the right timing? What are they asking for? To me, it's a different thing, especially, as I say, when it goes out on the internet. I feel like I have a different responsibility when something's being recorded, because even you're asking the question now, but I'm answering it to, as I said, people, I'm answering you, but I'm answering people I don't know. Does that make sense, or have I just complicated and sort of made a bomb somewhere? I think it's really important. I don't actually know the answer, or I feel unsure with regard to the PT, but with the happiness, yeah, I think I would a little bit more insist on that in this way of teaching the jhanas. Again, if I think of the jhanas as just, all I'm doing is getting more and more concentrated, more and more able to hold my mind. None of this matters. It's just a matter of, as you do that, you'll notice that you go through these different stages, but basically what's most important is, are you thinking, are you not thinking, and how steadily can you hold your mind on an object? To me, that's not, again, we're back to large framework and how that, the implications that has for what I'm doing. Is that okay? Yeah, okay. Thank you for asking that. Okay, so the second thing I wanted to say was, back to the effort thing. So as we do all this, I said the effort question never goes away. It only gets more subtle, if anything, but it's never something that we should never be totally abandoning, and we need to be willing to overshoot, both overshoot the effort at times and undershoot. Overshoot and undershoot the mark of right effort at any moment. I need to be willing to do that and taste that and recognize what it feels like. Oh, when I really overshoot, I get a headache in between my eyes and whatever it is, and when I undershoot, I fall asleep, or there's a really extreme, but even with the subtle overshooting and undershooting, I really need to get a sense, recognize, oh, that's what that feels like, and to do that, I have to be willing. I have to be willing to actually, let's try a bit more, or let's try a bit less, whatever my habit is. So we're back to this question of inertia. Remember, we were talking about inertia in the first couple of days? Do I have inertia with effort levels? And the opposite of inertia is fluidity, malleability, ease of movement, and my willing to just slide that effort up and down and play with it, and say, oh, yeah, too much. Oh, yeah, not enough. Whatever, in this moment. So inertia creeps in certainly to our meditation practice, certainly to our jhana practice, and actually to our lives in all kinds of ways. So one ongoing inquiry is where is there inertia? Where might there be inertia? For me. But that's part of developing the skill and the art with effort levels. And then, as we said, we're playing with the intensity of the effort, up and down, the intensity of delicacy, all that. Remember, intensity of probing, but also intensity of opening. We don't tend to think of opening or abandoning and surrendering as being something that one can do intensely, or maybe better radically, is a better word. So we really want to get the feel for, again, the whole spectrum on those dimmer switches of intensity and get the feel for being able to play with it. They're up to us. It's deliberate. We can change that fader switch. So that was the second thing. The third thing occurred to me. Here's a question. And, again, it's one of these things that may not apply now, but it may apply now. But the next time that you feel... I just want to qualify the thing I said about Rolf. Many times people have asked me in a certain moment, or with regard to a certain issue or a certain thing they're working on. But my memory is you just said that more universally. But many times people will say, well, I'm working with this image. What do you see or what do you think is helpful? So just... Okay. Is it tea time? No. So the third thing, this may or may not be relevant now. It doesn't matter. But I would really... It's something you can play with, a little game that I think might be really, really fruitful as a kind of mental exercise or a kind of thought experiment or something. Okay. I guess I've got a few parts to it. If you entertain the idea... So just... First part of this game is you entertain the idea that whatever is... Whatever your mind is kind of snagged on, if your mind is snagged on something at a certain point, if it's circling around something, some issue or snagged on some issue, or if it feels like it's being held back by something, either a little bit, like really subtly or quite a lot, or dragged somewhere by something little or in a large way, in a less strong way. I can't read what I've written here. It doesn't matter. I know what I want to say. What if you entertain the idea that actually that issue and its effect on you actually has as its real root, its real origin, a hindrance? It's not about what I think it is, but no matter how... So it's just a game. She knows me too well. I actually entertain a concept first, this concept that actually hindrances are more originary. They're the origins of things that we then later don't recognize as hindrances. They're like seedlings that sprout, and then we have a tree and we see a tree and we don't recognize the seed. This is related to what I said. If we're not careful, hindrances become papancia. We said papancia is the opposite of samadhi completely. Did we all agree on that? It's completely the opposite of samadhi. I'm circling around an issue or whatever. Sometimes it can be a very noble issue or whatever. I'm not insisting every time we're thinking about something or every time we're upset, we're just playing a game here, like a thought game. No matter how noble the issue, how important it seems, how important to my soul, et cetera, I just play with that view. Maybe the true origin of this thing is a hindrance. What has happened is that hindrance has not been recognized as a hindrance and it's been allowed to grow up and become a poisonous papancia tree. Because without a lot of care and practice, that's what happens with hindrances. That's what they do. Partwise, we get to a place where we don't believe the hindrance. It can seem so convincing. Even being really upset about this or that political issue, sometimes what's happening there is aversion. Part of us obviously really cares about this. Sometimes it's just our aversion is just hooking into this particular issue. It can all sound, yeah, yeah, yeah. There's actually a mixed, at times mixed. At times it's more one or more the other, sometimes. Can I just finish and then one second? We want to encourage the quietening of papancia because papancia is the opposite and the papancia prevents samadhi. Where there's papancia, there's no samadhi. Where there's samadhi, there's no papancia. They cannot coexist. What we're doing here is if we play this little game is we're tracing back the papancia. Through the aid of a certain entertaining, a certain conceptual possibility that it might have a hindrance as its root and tracing it back to its hindrance. Then we can work on it as a hindrance. It may not feel relevant at all now, but it might actually turn out to be really, really helpful as an exercise. One of the people I studied, one of the teachers I studied Jhana practice with, that was their main teaching on Jhana practice. This is really the point of Jhana and samadhi. Obviously, I've talked about it, but I want to emphasize it more now. I don't agree. I worry that it doesn't appeal to me that that would be the main thing, but it's hugely powerful. There are teachers out there, and you may well encounter them, that this is the main thing that we're doing. This is the main thing that we want to watch out for. Papancia, relating that to hindrances, dealing with the hindrances allows the samadhi. That's actually the most important thing. This is that person's teaching, but I feel it's a very valuable teaching. Just the game, just very light. Play with it. What I'm not signing up to, I believe this idea forever about all emotions, and I can never change my mind or anything. You're just entertaining a certain concept and seeing what happens for five minutes or whatever it is. Kirsten, was that your question? Yeah. Why don't we do... Yeah, thank you. Please. I keep it very short. I started to do this a little bit, and then sometimes I'm not clear what the hindrance is exactly. It might be a mixture, and then I might get lost a little bit in this. Yeah. Then I might go to restlessness. I just want to know how accurate it is then, or how important an accuracy of the hindrance is then to define the hindrance. That's really important. It was probably in what I just jotted that very briefly before coming in, so it was probably what I remember now is I'd written more than one hindrance, because what we often get is multiple hindrance attacks. It can be, in fact, maybe usually hindrances come in gangs. It's probably more than one, and that's fine. Maybe you can split them or whatever, or maybe even just thinking of that, just see what helps. Sometimes it's just a notion. It's a hindrance or hindrances of eduities. That's what I mean. Sometimes the precision of the identification is not important. It's just the note that, as I said, playing with a certain framework can actually reframe. Oh, maybe this is a hindrance, and I don't even know what the hindrance is. It doesn't matter. Just that can be enough. Other times it might be, no, I need to get clearer what the hindrance is, but I think the power is more in the general conception here, rather than identifying. Or rather that has a lot of power. You'll have to see in each instance. I don't think in every instance it's necessary to identify, and many times, many instances, there will be multiple hindrances going on, and two ganging up. Yeah, whatever. Yeah? Do you have the mic, Nicole? I have the mic. Okay. Yes. Okay, let's try and be quick. I've been playing, I think, this game a bit with the whole retreat, and it's been really helpful until yesterday when I fell down a hindrance cliff. And then I just, when I was in it, just got so angry at the question. And ultimately, I think it was a self-doubt hindrance cliff that I fell down. But I had to really take some time before I could play the game without it sort of working myself up even more. So I'm wondering around timing of the game or in this context, because I know I've worked with you with emotion in very different ways. And I brought in some of that, which helped. But when do you know? I mean, maybe the answer is, you know, if it's making it worse. When do you go, okay, stop playing that game and do something else? Yeah, thank you. That's really important. Again, so a few things there just to draw out what's really in your question. Again, everything what I just said is again, what I said on the opening and whenever it's all how we're working with emotions on this retreat is in a much larger context for me of going towards opening, working in skillful ways, soul making with emotions. And that feels really, really important. So partly for you or for anyone, just knowing that as well, putting it in that larger context, it reminds something in the being. So just that might be enough, you know, because I think if if let's say if our soul feels like it's getting squashed into a box, it's it's going to kick up a fuss and it should, you know, absolutely should. Does that make sense? So sometimes it might be enough just to remind myself of what what what bigger vision I have, you have in with regard to human emotional life, you know, and we're not talking about much at all on this retreat and I explained all that, but a different retreat, you know, I've done retreats where the primary thing is working with emotions in certain ways, but it's vast emotions. So if I if I tell my soul, it's vast. This is just what is just the game we're playing now. You know, that might help in itself. But even then, it might be that it's not the right time. So always the question is, what helps? How much time does it take to recognize this is really not? I don't know, you know. But you get a sense, especially with this is very common. This is very this is very common sort of discernment that one needs to make around emotions in any kind of Dharma practice. It's like I choose a certain way of working with it. And then after a while, I have to ask myself, is this really helping or is this not helping? And if it's not helping, but I don't know how long that while is, but certainly some certainly some minutes, you know, and. But after a while, if it's not, then I have to come out and do something else. You know, if it's just a matter of cooling off, you know, it might then be that the hindrance is just debated or it might be that in the cooling off period, I've somehow even subconsciously remembered the big, the bigger picture of emotions. I think the point more is the kind of what I want to convey is are we willing at again, do we have the freedom to view emotions that way sometimes? Do I have a freedom of a range of view and I'm not afraid because some people get very afraid of certain emotions and some people get very afraid of letting certain emotions go quiet, you know. Do I have no fear on either side? Do I have freedom and skill on either side? That's kind of where we want to get to eventually. And then also wisdom, just knowing that well, sometimes an emotion can actually be a hindrance or it's most helpfully viewed that way in origin and that's how we need to relate to it. So the thing I wanted to communicate is sometimes it's just we're so in what we're in at any time that it just doesn't occur to us to think that this could be a hindrance and we're so used to looking at emotions other ways. So it's more of a big view thing and then there might be, there's a periods of time or periods of practice where you're much more leaning into a certain relationship with things like emotions and then other periods where much different relationship. But if I think back to long retreat times and this isn't even for negative emotions, it's like it's beautiful emotions. I remember two instances at Guy House and one was a sort of short-lived thing and the other was a more general realization. The more short-lived thing was, I can't even put it in a context, but it was probably that I was doing some Adi practice for a stretch. And I just either remembered by heart a Mary Oliver poem about an owl and I can't remember the context, but somehow I went for a walk and I was reciting that to myself and was really touched by deeply touched by the beauty of it and I had kind of realized my soul needs that. My soul needs that in that moment, that particular poem, but also just not just, it's weird, not just P.T. and Sukkur and it's strange. We have this banquet here that we're talking about, but actually I think the soul is richer than that. So that's one thing. But then I gave, it was also, I remember near the beginning of retreat, so there was still a question for me like, okay, was that restlessness just settling into this retreat? I don't know. Maybe it was, maybe it wasn't, but I can also see that more generally, it's like if I was only ever, if you ask me, would you only ever want to experience P.T. Sukkur, peacefulness, stillness and all the eight genres and that was your whole emotional range, I would say no. I wouldn't like that. I would like the whole range, please. Thank you very much. Including like I said, including the grief, including even anger and all that. To me, it's part, this is more soul making thing, but to me, so that was more a moment. I was still left, I mean, it all settled down, but I was still left afterwards wondering, hmm, I wonder if that was just not quite settled yet on the retreat. It was like day four of a long retreat or something. I can't remember, but anyway, that was a question. The other thing, and I haven't mentioned this yet, is that for me, I can't remember exactly, but I was exploring again for a long time, really marinating and making my intention very clear on, I can't remember how many genres, but let's say the first four, like that was my territory that I was really, and I was on a long retreat, and at a certain point, I was as wonderful as they are, I'm actually missing something more mystical, so that their lovely experiences, and as we'll talk tomorrow about the third genre, hopefully, there is definitely the beginnings of a mystical sense, a sense of sacredness, but you can also very much practice those genres and not really have much sense at all of a mystical sense, and they're not, I would say, again, primary. So even if you're, like for me, my tendency is very much, my yearning is very much towards the mystical, but they're not really that primary in them, and I know lots of people that practice those first four genres without any mystical sense, and again, that goes in, it's related to a whole big conceptual framework, what are we doing here, what's important, but I realize for me, I feel something missing here. Again, it was in the context of a long solo retreat, and I knew that I had to keep my intention steady, we're back to that question about keeping, so I don't know, I think recognizing it was very helpful, I didn't, kind of, I didn't like then change what practices were, you know, but I can't remember what I did, but it wasn't, whatever I did worked, but it wasn't a kind of radical shift or change of direction, it was maybe just including something at the sides a bit more, or something like that, but again, that's probably a much longer answer than you wanted, but does that make sense what I just said? So okay, Mark, this has to be the last one, please. Oh thumbs up, good, okay. I'd drop into, maybe it was recognizing that, you know, I only missed the mystical because I knew the mystical, and you know, maybe where it's something that I'd never experienced outside, I would maybe have a sense, let's say I was a soul that wanted the mystical, but I hadn't experienced the mystical, and I was a forge, I was, well these are great, maybe I would have a vague sense of I'm missing something, as wonderful as this is, you know, absolutely wonderful as this is, I'm still missing something, maybe I would have had that sense, but not quite known what it was I was missing, I don't know, but back then I'd had quite a lot of different, all kinds of things, and I think a part of me, yeah, in the context, but recognizing, yeah, I can go back to that, I'm not signing up to this sort of forever, I will stay in the forge as long as I can and do nothing else, that was never in my, I never signed up to that, so maybe that, yeah, that larger context and a larger sense of positivity was helped, maybe, yeah, I probably did, yeah. Okay we need to end, so let's have a bit of quiet together please. Okay. Thank you guys so much........... Thank you everybody. Time for tea. And then I guess it's so hard and long I have to switch. Yeah, thank you. I'm going to stop my interviews at 7. Is there anything else to note?

 Okay, I was planning on doing a Q&A today, but I changed my mind and I want to start by talking about Q&As actually, because when I thought about doing a genre treat, that was the first thing that I thought about and the thing that I felt would be most challenging for everyone, including myself. How do you put a group of people with hugely different backgrounds, who have hugely different amounts of experience with a goal-oriented practice like genre practice, how do you put them in the same room and allow them to ask questions and hear the questions of other people without psychological mayhem and extreme dukkha and etc. So this really, I'm not exaggerating, this was really the main thing for me about the retreat, it wasn't about mapping the genres, it wasn't about teaching the nuts and bolts and all the subtleties, it was that. That was the thing and how are we going to do that and I meant to talk about all that near the beginning of the retreat and I don't know what happened, sorry if I did, but I don't remember talking, I meant to really, really raise it as an issue and really put it in the room for us to be conscious of and to take care of and maybe it's just all the preparing for the retreat and the busyness and the medical, I don't know what happened, but I didn't, so apologies for that. You know, what happens for some people at some times when we hear someone ask a question and it sounds like, well they're at a completely different level than us, they're way beyond or whatever it is or we feel, am I going to be perceived as some kind of grandiose, fancy, arrogant meditator if I ask my advanced question or is my question not advanced enough or too beginning or all that potential for comparison in an unhelpful way, self-judgment in an unhelpful way, making conclusions about selves, also about others, views, etc. I think it can be very difficult to ask questions for some people, very difficult, even the people that manage to ask questions, it can be so difficult that it kind of, oftentimes and not on this retreat, but on other retreats, this person's asked a question in the hall or if we go into the lounge or whatever and have given a response and they're there and they're nodding and then afterwards we have an interaction and I say, was that helpful and they say, I don't know because I was completely checked out after I'd asked the question and I just wasn't there. So all that's very, very normal and it can be very painful for some people at some times to hear a certain question or whatever it is or a certain given back and forth or a certain instruction, it's not just about Q&A's. Even yesterday just moving to the second genre and giving instructions for those and even I say, you know, your pace is your pace and it needs to be your pace and how easy we can think, oh, I'm not there yet and how painful it can be to just hear things just from, about states or openings or insights, whatever that seem to be beyond us and what can happen and the way the mind can tie itself in kind of, not just knots but knots of barbed wire, you know, really, really painful. So we could and maybe we should, I don't know, you know, add the possibility of asking questions by note as well so I can just get some notes and they could be anonymous and I can try my best to do that and then maybe if the person wants to identify themselves they could and if they don't, they don't and just hope that my answer kind of hits the spot and that's certainly a possibility, we can think about it but in a way, you know, I just wonder whether to some degree that might be avoiding a much larger issue and I think the issue is cultural. So I can't think of one passage in the Pali Canon where it reports something like this. So and so was there and wanted to ask a question but felt, you know, they would be judged or they heard so and so's interaction with the Buddha or Ananda or whatever it was and they felt really bad or it's just not there and I don't think it's there as far as I've heard. I haven't really practiced much in Asia like with, you know, with really Asian people a lot but I have teachers who have and from what I've heard it's not really there. Somehow they're able to be in a group together, one person is, you know, working on the last stage of awakening to final enlightenment and the other person's somewhere in the middle somewhere and the other person's somewhere else and it's all really, it's somehow okay. So I think the larger issue is partly a really cultural issue to what has happened to our culture, I mean our Western culture with all its gifts and all its wondrous achievements. What has happened that this has become such a difficult sort of scenario to be in together and it's partly to do also with and I think I've mentioned this in here and certainly other talks, we actually have quite a different sense of self, not just an idea of what the self is but actually our sense of self is very different. We live in a different culture that the self is differently supported and differently alienated and there's pressures on the self in our culture and our time that did not exist, say for example at the time of the Buddha or in other cultures and there's a lot of gifts that come from that in terms of individuality and self-expression and creativity but there's a price and sometimes those very potential gifts, my potential creativity, my potential self-expression, they become really, really painful things. They don't become gifts, they become things that become really painful because the person feels like, well I know I can, I should and other people seem to but where's mine? Well mine doesn't compare. So to me it's a really interesting question. So I really mean what actually has happened? How did this happen to our culture and to our society and our sense of being together? And I'm not going to go into that. I certainly don't know all the answers but I find it really interesting and it's something I think about and something I try and read about and whatever. So I just want to say a few things and having said that, you know, with all the teachings on the retreat and everything that's said is like some of it will feel relevant to you right now and some of it won't feel relevant but it should be relevant at some point. So these issues should be relevant at some point about the problem of having a goal and the problem of comparison and the problem of having a desire for something and what comes up with that and the problem of really wanting something and getting frustrated. So if it doesn't feel relevant now, it should at some point and if it never does then that's in a way its own problem and that should be relevant. An inquiry, why do I never feel any issue about that? So it may or may not feel relevant today but that goes for all the teachings in the retreat. I think it will be, should be relevant at some point. So some of what I want to say is just some reminders of things, you know, there's a lot of information in the first whatever it was, six, seven days of the retreat. Some of it will be reminders. As I said there was a lot that was said there and some of it, it just, the significance that I think I said, I don't know if you remember me saying you won't realize the significance of some things I'm saying. So some of them I'm going to repeat just as little reminders. I mean the first is you can do this. You can do this. Everyone in this room can do this and by this I mean what I'm talking about with all the marination and the mastery and the wonderful sounding experience, you can do this. Sometimes you believe that you can't and that you never will be able to but you can do this. You really can. I was just hearing from someone yesterday a couple of days ago in that, oh I can't and everything shrinks, everything gets contracted, stuck, hatred, self-hatred, the whole show gets going. People shows up thankfully and then a couple of days later, lo and behold, an opening like they never had before. You can do this. If you have ever experienced some lovely well-being from meditation, in meditation, say PT, some lovely well-being through the body, I stand by this. If you have ever experienced that, it means that everything what I'm talking about is possible for you. The whole thing, the whole nine yards, the whole eight jhanas is possible. You can do this. The fact that there is a dip, a disappearance of what you had experienced before, a non-occurrence of it for an afternoon, a day, three days, whatever it is, does not imply that it has then become impossible for you. It doesn't actually even imply that you're going backwards in practice. Remember this thing or that thing? It really doesn't imply that. What it should imply instead is, okay, here's the dip. It's probably just a hindrance attack of one form or other, one degree or other that has maybe got more and more spinning out more and less papancia. So it's a dip. It should rather imply, okay, what should I do with this? What can I do with this? It should bring some questions, which is part of the whole art of responsiveness that we've been stressing. What might be helpful right now in relation to this, in relation to this dip, in relation to this non-occurrence? Dips in the context of jhana practice, yeah, they can last three days or something. Three days on retreat in a dip, in a hindrance attack, especially if it's wound up and gotten the papancia stuff going, three days is a long time to sit through that. There's no TV. There's no, it's Christmas and you haven't had a drink and it's like, it's a long time to be through that. If I'm believing it, that's a long time and it seems like forever and it's not. It's a dip that's lasted three days. Of course, it doesn't, you can get dips of a couple of hours or half a day, like I said, but question, responsiveness, question, okay, what might be helpful now? What should I try? Let's play. Okay, and of course you feel very heavy and down. You don't feel playful, so think of it as work or think of it as play. Just find a way of relating and responding. How should I view the meditation object? What way of viewing it right now when things really don't feel like they're working, what can I play with there? How should I view my practice as a whole? How should I view Jhana practice? How should I view myself on the path? Remember I said that the view of the self on the path is extremely significant. It's a make or break factor. I know people, I don't know if I said this, I'll say it again, it doesn't matter. I've known people meditating for years, have had all kinds of deep experiences, all kinds of what could be very liberating experiences, and somehow they're not. They add up to very little over the long run. What's kind of locking the whole thing in this unliberating incapacity is a kind of self view that's operating, that not even really conscious of the view of the self on the path. It's almost like it strangles anything else. It squeezes out the potential of any experience or opening or insight delivering anything kind of really either stably or radically liberating. How should I view then the objective meditation? How should I view my practice? How should I view my Jhana practice? How should I view my practice in general? How should I view myself on the path? How should I view this dip, this absence, this trough of the wave? I mentioned for the soul makers how important it might be to have a really supportive imaginal fantasy of the self on the path. Or is it actually okay? It's not going well right now. It's either very rough or just very dry or something, and I just need to stay steady with that. I just need to keep plugging away. It's a hindrance attack. I just need to keep showing up. I need to be patient and just keep working. The pivotal question really is does it imply a reality or a truth about you, this dip, this non-occurrence, this absence, even if it's three days? Does it really imply a truth about you and about your practice and your capacities as a practitioner? Or is it just that there is a habitual tendency of believing something about the self? I'm just used to believing that I can't, that I'm a failure, that other people can, that whatever it is. I put that question to you. How do you hear it? It's kind of like Rob saying, he's being kind and nice and saying, don't worry about it. No, I mean it for you to take as a question and ask the question intensely sometimes. Sometimes. Because you can embarrass, nice, nice, nice. It's not. I really mean it as a question. Is this, does it really imply a reality, a truth about me? What might I believe that truth is? Or is it a habitual tendency to believe something about the self? It's a real question for you. Remember this thing about listening on your toes? It's what I'm talking about here. We can easily hear something like what I just said. You've heard it so many times on Inside Retreat. It's sort of like, oh yeah, here's the nice kind bit sort of thing. And it goes in one ear and out the other. No. Grab it by the. Ask it intensely. Ask it. I tried to remember. I can't remember. So these figures may be a little wrong. But if I remember back, I think I sort of, well, I wouldn't say I stumbled into the first genre because it was something that I was interested in right from the beginning when I first heard of them. It really picked my curiosity in practice. But somehow or other I got into the first genre on an Inside Retreat years ago. And no. Yeah. So I had a bit I had quite some P.T. and stuff and actually problematic, problematic relationship with P.T. that, as I said, I went pretty lunatic for a while. So there was that whole period really P.T. in a very unfruitful way. Quite some years. In fact, you don't have to replicate my mistakes here, but I just want to give you kind of reality check. Remember, I said this thing about drop schedules. If you if you're attached to a schedule, it will bring Dukoh is what it will bring. Remember me saying that. So just to give you a comparison, I had this very long opening to P.T., which is very pleasurable for a little bit and then got very, very problematic for really, I think, the better part of two or three years had to stop practicing for quite a while, do all kinds of other explorations and then come back to practice and start very gently again. So you don't have to do all that. It's partly as they're coming from over efforting. Then I resume practice and in time I got a little bit P.T. and then even some happiness at some point and then a little while later on a retreat, I got into the first Jana. It was an insight retreat. Luckily, the teacher that I told I'm pretty sure was Christina and she's she was very, very pro Jana encouraging of that and she was to me and and it's sort of like I didn't get a negative. That's a bad thing. Then I was lined up for a whole series of retreat and I can't remember exactly. But then I think I came on a month retreat and most of that month I didn't do anything else but Jana practice. That was my intention. I said the intention was really good. It took me the whole month to really feel like it became stable and it became good. Then there was maybe some of that mastery and then quite a while later I came back for more retreats and I sort of started. I probably didn't need to but I did. I took the time. I don't know if I need to. I took the time to do all over again. What I'm really saying is it's a slow process or it can be a really slow process. So if you're thinking or Rob sitting there, he probably just you know this and that. This is not true. Okay. And I've said this in imaginal context as well. It's like I'm not particularly a person who has a lot of images or whatever. So is it something about you or is it something about the way we relate? What I can say is and I'll come back to this is I feel like I've worked hard at how I related to things that I really wanted goals that I really wanted openings that I really wanted and that makes a difference. It's not some super duper talent or something natural inclination. I can't remember if there's that's exactly completely something like that. So sometimes in the whole someone will ask a question and maybe I might even say yes that sounds like the third genre or something like that and you feel like I'm still trying to get PT stable or coming. But maybe that person who's asking that question about what seems to be the third genre and what may well be the third genre. You know maybe they've been doing this for years. Maybe they've been doing Jhana practice for years or on and off the years. So it's just good to bear that in mind and also bear in mind that okay they may have that opening but they may be they may have other gaps in their practice or they may be struggling with other difficulties that aren't in the question at that point. But when the mind shrinks so easily around what it hears and with comparison etc. You know another thing I said earlier in the retreat was I see this three weeks or however long we got together this three weeks I see it in a much larger context of your much larger potential context of your your lives and your practice. And I would really encourage you to see it the same way. So this three weeks that we're spending together is you know has its context in potentially years of Jhana practice. And doesn't that of course I think I said one time you could take a three year Jhana practice. Yeah if that's what you want to do and if the opportunity arises but I mean just periods. Most of you maybe not all of you but most of you in this room will be dedicated seriously to Dharma practice for the rest of your lives and I hope that's very long lives. And within that you may have like period stretches where you just revisit Jhana practice and I'll talk about that at the end of the retreat. So I see this this retreat in that context. Something's interesting you know a lot of people wanted to come on this retreat a lot of people there wasn't room for some reason Guyhouse made it a much smaller retreat the numbers a lot of people were disappointed and I partly felt like it's only three weeks. What do you you know it's like don't put too much pressure on the expectation on these three weeks. The recordings will be there the teachings will be there. So really it's like what is it to work and play now on these three weeks to work and play as I say play hard play hard you know give it wholeheartedness your work and play but without putting too much pressure on on these three weeks. So I really really mean this it's sort of not like oh if I say that somehow you'll feel better or something I mean you hopefully will but three weeks is just three weeks this retreat is just three weeks the fact that I'm here it's like it's not that much difference you know it's like well the fact that you are we are together and other people are not now with me here. Okay so a lot of this is repeat but just to am I doing the practices that have helped in the past give rise to well-being and PT am I actually choosing those practices or am I for some reason choosing other practices. That's a really important question if if if you ask that and you find you're not then why what's actually happening there. Couple of other reminders of things I said earlier remember about the intention and how important that is and what what what do I think I'm doing when I come into a formal practice sit walk stand whatever it is what do I semi-consciously or subconsciously think I'm doing I'm wanting to develop PT wanting to develop Jhana but there were a whole host of other beautiful things that we're we could potentially realize that we're developing at the same time right such as I can't hear any of you one at a time sorry attunement wholeheartedness sensitivity patience kindness very good trust love for Dharma mindfulness what was it huh non-judgment beautiful this is really important a it those are really really important qualities if you get to the eighth Jhana and you're just as unkind or just a self judgmental or just as impatient it's like it's not that interesting we have to look at the big picture so those are really important qualities and opening up the intention again and again to realize this is what I'm doing here we get so tight even now some of you may not even be this may not be landing at all we get so tight opening up the view will help your help everything it will help your well-being we talked also about opening up the intention so that it's not just about me right remember talked about practicing for each other and showing up for each other and practicing for all beings and again this is one of the things it's very easy to sort of like oh yeah yeah sure yeah can you be radical with this would you know how to do that so we can just oh yeah that's a good idea and kind of do it once or twice like a bit half-heartedly what would it be to be radical with this really radical try and and if you don't know what it means to be radical with something like that try what is this this intention to practice like I'm just giving away the intention not for myself for others radically for all beings see if you can get a sense of that and the power of that sometimes I talked about exchanging self and other right so some of you don't know that practice but I briefly described this took these hindrances this misery this pain of stagnation this pain of not getting what I want of not opening to what I love this pain of self comparison in a negative way whatever it is I take this took on I take this suffering so that magically somewhere someone can have the openings that they yearn for and that can apply to all kinds of took this a radical it's a radical practice it's a radical reorienting of of will of intention etc. Who's heard of the Noble Eightfold Path? Who's heard of the four foundations of mindfulness? Who's heard of the seven factors of awakening? Who's heard of the four bases of power? Itdipada it's one of the Buddha's lists itdipada four bases of power sometimes translates four bases of success four bases of accomplishment I'm not going to go into them I'm just going to mention before desire persistence intent and discrimination discernment about what is skillful and unskillful so I'm giving a very shorthand version but the four itdipada four bases of success let's call them that four bases of success or accomplishment desire persistence intent and discrimination about what skillful and what's unskillful yeah itdipada is IDHI or IDDHI I think yes yes IDDHI so it's related to us it's the Pali for Siddhi basically that's IDDipada P-A-D-A and the Buddha says whoever develops whoever cultivates whoever gives attention to these four bases of power gives attention to and develops the Eightfold Path and the path to the ending and to liberation and whoever neglects these four bases of power neglects the Eightfold Path neglects the way forsakes the way to liberation it's quite interesting to me that most of you have never heard of this list before sometimes it's a list that gets associated with psychic powers and stuff but actually as in the quote I just gave for the Buddha it's very connected with the Eightfold Path and liberation it's quite interesting that we haven't heard of this why why do you think we haven't heard of this might it have anything to do with the fact that desire is one of them and the word power yeah so power is not power over power is in physics power is kind of like related to the capacity to work the capacity to do or to make something happen it's like oh desire let's maybe sweep it in the corner where or put it under the rug where it won't be seen to be part of I wonder whether that's partly to do with the whole deal so I want to talk a little bit about design I've talked an enormous amount about desire some you know in other contexts in the context of talking about Eros and soul making and all that stuff I don't want to talk at great length I just want to say a few things and not so much about the soul making and Eros aspects of it but here we have a desire and a desire is always for something a desire always have a desire for something so there's whatever word you want something I want to achieve or a goal or some thing I want to open or attain experience and and then in this case we're on a retreat we're working or playing or trying to move towards something that we desire what we learn in that process here's the desire and I'm not just gonna abandon my desire what I learn then I want to get that whatever that is in this case John John or whatever what I learn in that process what I develop in that process what I learn about my relationship with desire and about my relationship with goals it may well be the biggest or the most important part of this practice it may well be more important than attaining this or that Jhana how many people believe what I just said it's really interesting okay I really really mean that I've really really mean that so what happens when we put ourselves in a context like this we're only really doing this practice we're only really meditating there's nothing else and then what we're putting most attention to becomes what the self is most likely to judge itself about or in relationship to yeah if we were doing something very different you wouldn't be judging how your meditation is going and it wouldn't be the self itself would be constructed around something very different put yourself in an environment like this it's meditate meditate meditate there's talk of different goals there's nothing else really going on that's what the self will get constructed the self needs something in relation to which it constructs itself constructs itself either in a in a nice way a good feeling way a grandiose way a problematic way a contracted and difficult way but in this kind of environment it will construct around practice and around how practice is going so we notice practice can't help but be up and down and what happens in this environment when there's this emphasis huge emphasis kind of obsessional emphasis on meditation and not just meditation but meditation along certain lines and towards certain ends practice goes up and down and then how much because of that with it the mood goes up and down and with that very easily the whole belief gets dragged into that and the whole perception and belief of self of others of the world of practice of guy house of whatever it is this is so so important so that if I turn this around let's see um so this business this real up and down where everything gets kind of feels like it's really difficult feels like I'm not getting anywhere feels like maybe I'm failing etc this this what's the word the amplitude of that curve yeah if by the end of the retreat it moves to this the amplitude is smaller that would be a massive success a massive success and what makes the amplitude smaller that we don't believe so much what the mind is saying then back to this thing when I talked about the hindrances I don't believe so much the stories that get spun when I have a strong desire for something an intense desire for something it gets charged it becomes a focal point of charge and in relation to that focal point of charge my mood and my whole sense of self gets constructed in in a very turbulent way on these waves and then the whole world of papansha can get constructed with it and if the amplitudes of of that construction and that whole curve can can decrease that would be that would be huge and it gets less primarily through learning not to believe what what the hindrances are saying what the mind is saying what the conclusions what the beliefs are about self about practice not to take them personally I'm just repeating what I said before but it's it's of such great significance so really I'm I'm being totally honest saying saying this stuff by the end of the retreat I would view that as a as a huge development and a huge success if that's that's what happened that's what you could report back to me and and in terms of the whole life that may be more significant and more transformative and more liberating than that you attain this or that jhana so I you know again it's like or another way of saying is remember I said jhana practice is this it's not this it includes the difficulty and how I'm relating to the difficulty remember I said that jhana practice includes the really grotty grimy sloggy boring unsexy unglamorous unimpressive bits I I really really invite you again into that much bigger view of what we're doing this is what I mean by jhana practice anything smaller is a kind of immature understanding it will not bear the same fruit you're you're limiting if I have a limited view I will limit the fruit so I really really again and again invite you into this much larger view of what you're doing here what the territory is and what counts as jhana as fruitful jhana practice doesn't always feel good and then the half of the time or whatever it is the proportion of time when it really doesn't feel good is just as valuable at least as valuable so can I somehow have that bigger view and work and play and play hard and be wholehearted and all that without giving up the desire you know um um slight risk in in saying this but I'm gonna say it anyway um um what exactly the desire or desires is or are in doing jhana practice or devoting time anytime in your life to a period of jhana retreat or jhana practice what exactly the desires are what exactly are you wanting there and why and also how we relate to those desires or that desire those two things how we relate to our desire and desires and what exactly are we desiring and why are we desiring so all that whole conglomeration there that may be it may be extremely significant and determinative in what actually unfolds for you interesting I'm tentative to bring this up but it's um so why would I do a jhana retreat I might want the pleasure I've heard about these lovely states of pleasure or I might have for instance met or read some monk who said oh you you need to have jhanas and if you don't have jhanas you're kind of wasting your time on the Buddhist path so I should and my desire is is my desire for the pleasure is my desire coming out of a should in which case it's a it's a maybe it's a should because I really want liberation but maybe that's another should so going going into the desires a little more actually unpacking the layer the range and the layers the variety and the layers of desires is it because I like the teacher or maybe I know someone who likes the teacher and they said that he she they were cool whatever is it because I want to achieve something I want to get my badges and again what why what's that coming from if what we talked about this yesterday it's like how the desire for achievement may be coming from different places or different impulses in in the psyche in the self sense is it because I want to improve my focus the ability of my mind to concentrate and focus on something and again if so why and then maybe I get an answer to the why and then again why is it that I'm heard about these mystical states and I'm curious about them or I have a desire for a mystical kind of opening is it that I want to go on this or that particular retreat because my friend is going or my partner is going and they're really enthusiastic and I just kind of go with them or is it I'm actually not quite sure or I really don't know or lots of lots of other things so do we realize what the mix of desires and intentions and impetuses are and do we realize what I said earlier that they're actually very significant and that my relationship with the desire is very is extremely significant what actually unfolds so again I would say that for many people that what I've just said is more significant than as a teaching than if I were to give a certain technical explanation how it might help to move from this Jhana to the next Jhana remember I use this phrase getting it developing a nose for it do you remember partly what I mean and what I was talking about that is what's significant and what's less significant what has a kind of meta significance and what just a kind of smaller significance so if I were to give two teachings let's say one about what I've just said about desire and one about let's say one I just said okay here's how you can move from this Jhana to this Jhana just try this or whatever do I do I have the kind of wisdom and the kind of intuition the kind of nose for it that recognizes that's the really significant teaching this is subsidiary so I hesitate to say all that because all what I've just said and those questions and those points they may be quite agitating for some people and maybe confusing for some people but a few of you or a few people listening to this let's say a few people maybe need to get clearer about that well there may come a time when that actually though exactly those questions and going deeper into those questions is exactly what you need and it may be there are people listening who don't realize that later on at some point they will really really it will be a very significant question but you understand this thing about it's like it's hard I think it's hard for human beings sometimes it's hard for us to listen and get a kind of a structural understanding of teachings that's what partly what I mean by a nose for it like what are the sort of top level hierarchy teachings and what are the sort of lower level detail teachings does that make sense it's quite a rare sort of gift or skill or whatever to actually develop this this sense of being able to order the hierarchy of teachings and something on a top level high is actually much more significant oftentimes when it's given as a teaching it doesn't sound significant it doesn't sound significant the thing that sounds significant is this little detail or little tip or whatever it is so but over time I think we can develop that art and skill you know actually learning to think more structurally more globally and and in that process it's it's not so much a thinking as it is a thinking but it's also an intuition I feel it's really really important um so you know what happens to us as human beings with desire when we have desire when we have a strong desire do we even recognize I said what kinds of desire we have or what's actually moving us and is it a deep desire in our being or is it something else or what's what's running us what desires run in us etc but having a deep desire and something you really want it's difficult it's it's unless you just get what you want immediately it's difficult so I you know I've been in this hall you know as a yogi lots uh lots of times and I remember in another context wasn't a jhana retreat I was on a long retreat and hearing interaction between a student and teacher and it seemed to me at the time that the teacher was corroborating this student's awakening and uh you know I had to go for a long walk after that long long walk um um at that time it didn't generate all this you know I'm a failure etc but it you know I wanted something so much and just to hear back to what we're talking about back back Q and A's and that's what just to hear or witness something where it seemed like someone had something that I wanted so deeply so much I cared so passionately about it's difficult you know it was difficult for me and that was even without the whole self I can't I never will dah dah dah by that point that was not there so much um to give you a more another example you know I some of you know I was a musician um before I was a Dharma teacher and I started playing I started playing the guitar very late um I was introduced to Jimi Hendrix at about 17 years old and just fell in love and was also introduced to this young guy I watched on tv playing guitar concerto and I just thought wow I want to do that and it doesn't matter the details but my uh let's say I had I went to university had to do the whole academic thing at university wasn't it wasn't uh didn't seem I wasn't I was really really a beginner for you know years after that into my 20s etc and I did I went through university studying something else and and I really really really wanted to do music I had such a almost viscerally painful desire that felt like something wanted to come out and express and manifest and this could get a very long story but um so for different reasons complex painful reasons um my my father was really not supportive of this idea and um for him it was very important I pursued an academic career and this sort of thing etc and um what happened was I disagreed with him um I had found a music school in America where I could uh go still being pretty much a beginner and they would let me in and I had enough money for a few months not even a whole year of it and I just went very difficult with my father etc um and there there are reasons for him for that but don't have to go into it um so people around me thought you're crazy I mean clearly you're you're into guitar but you're not very good um and it was true I was really I wasn't very good I was a beginner um and my mother uh I would say I want to say a few things to get about all this it's about desire and and how we handle desire my mother I would say if I compare uh musically myself and my mother I would say well first thing is musical talent is not one thing there's lots of different talents in music as there are in meditation it's not one thing that we're talking about it's a lot of different talents so if you do the music it's like okay there's compositional and how your ear is and the earring can do this or that or the sense of form or there's a million different things um so even compositional talent is is is a bunch of different things improvisational talent even I was into jazz guitar so even that's a you know a lot of different things my mother um I would say is is in some respects at least got much more talented musically than I am I would say she can do things easily that for me didn't come easily or naturally um so here I was uh I probably could have had my pick or choose of any academic direction at that point that I wanted to go in um and I went off to America instead to try um to try and become a jazz musician with not much money etc but I had this intuition that and I knew I wasn't very good I mean it was obvious like I said I knew I was a beginner I had this intuition that my desire and my longing and my eros the depth of love that I had for music and the sort of need for it to come out um it was obvious that it was much more than my my mother so I said she's able to do this or that quite fast but she doesn't love music anywhere near the depth that I love music and so she never really developed it and but I had this intuition that somehow the depth of love and the depth of my desire was somehow proportional to my talent that wasn't manifesting or the possibility do you understand what I'm saying that that my love and my desire itself indicated something that wasn't visible it indicated something about what might be possible for me and it indicated something about a talent that really was not visible so I'm not just you're probably thinking oh yeah I bet he was really and he's just no I really I really I was really a beginner and so I got to this music school where the joke was um uh all you need all you need to get in is a check and a pulse and I took advantage of that I had the at least for you know a third of a year or whatever I had the check I didn't know what I was going to do after that but I had that check and I had the pulse then the joke went the second half was lately it seems all you need is the check but um anyway but this school it was at that time it was pretty much the only school in the world where you could study jazz so that was that was the place to make it to this is years ago in the 80s and um and so I was really the bottom of the bottom there and I really mean it you know and so there were people because it was the only place a lot of people would come from all over the world they were already you know totally accomplished music they were just there so they could get an American visa for a while so they could make connections move to New York and be a jazz musician in New York etc it was just a so you had this enormous range I mean really really super accomplished musicians they didn't need to be taught hardly anything all the way down to me and I and I had this this like a visceral desire so I would go you know to college and I was really happy to be out of that you know out of that whole scene in England doing what I loved but it was really really painful and I would you know go and then you know have a sort of humiliating day in college playing and being heard and then hearing other people play and all that and would sometimes drag my guitar case home you know um I'm not exaggerating it's really really difficult um I'm glad you find it funny it was it was you know somehow I stayed 15 years and I developed as a musician I worked so hard at it and it was difficult in all kinds of ways because my point really is um if I love something deeply if I really desire something deeply I and I was I was right about the talent about the talent thing you know I I feel really um touched and blessed by what eventually manifested um so that intuition about if I love it this much there must be something that's wants to express that that I would say that turned out to be right and I feel very humbly touched by by what came in the end but but the point the main point is if we really desire something if we let ourselves feel that desire and don't just throw it away and don't just shun it and then I've got to find a way of tolerating that tolerating being okay with the pain of it that that comes with it often the cut of it the burning of it the frustration that comes with it sometimes the setbacks of that whole journey so one journeys with a desire the desire uh is is the end just what's the basis of success the basis of of accomplishment it's part of the the fuel and somehow if I have this desire and I'm not going to throw it away and I'm going to let myself be on fire then at least some of that time I'm going to meet frustration I'm going to meet difficulty I'm going to meet setbacks I'm going to meet hurdles that seem insurmountable problems that seem I don't know I'm going to and the question is what how am I going to hold that how am I going to relate to that can I tolerate it yeah looking back you know in all that time in music I suppose I could say from one point of view I suppose I could say the desire to express and to manifest um what wanted to manifest what one is I could I suppose I could say that that desire was bigger than my desire to be free of the pain that came with the desire the pain of failing of not of not measuring up the pain of feeling like I was behind people of comparing poorly for a long the pain of for a long time falling short of where even in my mind what I would I could hear in my mind it what manifested had you know was so poor in comparison what manifested in terms of what came out was so poor the pain of all that that desire was one way of seeing it was thankfully that was less than the desire to manifest so this is interesting you know to me it's interesting um how much of my dukkha right now in relation to what my desire and whatever it is I love and in this case jhana practice on this retreat how much is about negative self view and how much in other words it would almost latch on to anything put you in another context and it would latch on to that put me in another context where everyone's doing this and we're doing this all day and it would latch on to onto that how much of it is coming from that it's just the propensity for negative self view finding some charged or object that becomes charged through repetition through teaching through environment and it just the dukkha builds on that the negative self you build on that and how much of it is from uh from the frustration about what I deeply love which is different to me dukkha you know the difference so how much of my dukkha right now is coming from uh is coming from like I said in in relation to there's something I really deeply love and it's just frustrating not to be there not to have that opening not to reach it but it's in relation to something I deeply love and how much of my dukkha is actually just a kind of propensity for negative self view which could latch itself onto all kinds of things and put put if I put myself in another situation where we're emphasizing again and again and again something else that thing gets charged this practice that practice this thing that thing and other people around and then the negative the the self gets constructed as I said before in relation to that charge thing through repetition through environment and then the propensity for the self to get constructed with a negative self view in relation to that thing how much of my dukkha is that kind of dukkha and how much of my dukkha is is the other kind I don't need to know in percentages but in terms of practice it's more like is it possible at times to focus on on the former on on on the real deep desire now to do that I might have to go into and through my pain not around my pain because there will be a certain kind of pain with that desire I want something so much so deeply I yearn for it and and it's not here but the pain is different than the I'm crap and I can't do this and then you know the self view pain so can I focus on the former desire through focusing finding that that pain that goes with that feeling that where there's that pain there will be the desire that goes with that pain does this make sense so the pain takes me that specific pain takes me to that specific desire and that specific desire is actually a beautiful thing and is there a way that I can then be with that desire in a way that I feel the energy of that desire and the love in the desire and the devotion in the desire and the alignment in the desire and even the beauty of desire so there's a kind of potential alchemy here through the dukkha but I have to again discriminate to certain which which threads am I following here desire desire is hard it's hard if I say yes to desire I'm saying yes to the buddha's analogy a burning coal neither I throw that burning coal away or I learn how to relate to it and I tolerate my burning and where there's burning there's beauty and even blessing benediction and gift if but I have to find that I have to find the right way to let this let myself be on fire let that fire burn in me let that desire move in me in a way that's actually fruitful and some of that takes quite fine discernment through the pain okay like I said may that didn't that's all I want to say for today maybe that didn't feel relevant right now it should at some point feel relevant because if you do this kind of stuff long enough if you have the desire it can get hard so I hope that at some point at least it will certainly be relevant but also feel relevant and you'll recognize that okay let's um let's just have a bit of quiet together so Right now, is it possible, however you're feeling and however you feel your practice is going, whether you're flying right now and really pleased with how things are opening, whether you're actually quite struggling and quite unsure and feel a little bit disappointed or dejected about how it's going, or somewhere in between? Is it possible right now for you to get a sense of the beauty of your desire? The beauty of your desire to practice, for practice, for what you want in practice, for the deepest callings that brought you here. Can you get a sense for how beautiful that is? How beautifully it manifests, how beautifully it manifests in you, that seed, that calling? The desire itself is something beautiful. Your desire, your soul's desire, a treasure, for sure a double-edged sword, but something wonderful, miraculous, potent, a gift. Is it possible to perhaps to look back perhaps over the days of this retreat so far, perhaps over your life of practice and recognize, acknowledge, open your eyes to, open your memory to all those times you've been willing to show up, try again, put effort in, put up with what's difficult, worked patiently, played persistently? Recognize that. Is it possible to acknowledge that? Can you again see the beauty of that, of that willingness, of that work, of that play, of that patience? Can you love that one? That one who keeps showing up. Can there be appreciation towards that one who keeps showing up? Trust towards that one. Cherishing of that one. I'm glad you discussed that, but if anyone else phoned onANDyAl jars for exchangelist Maybe even a hug for that one. Maybe even a hug for that one. Maybe even a hug for that one. These are the gifts in you, to you, planted in the core of your heart from the divine, from the Buddha nature. Seeds planted, this desire, this willingness, your desire, your willingness. Seeds, jewels, given to you, planted in you, coming through you from the divine, from the Buddha nature. Please consider supporting DharmaSeed with a year-end gift. Your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all. Visit DharmaSeed.org-slash-donate to learn more. And thanks.

 Okay, so today I would like to talk about the second Jhana and weave into that as usual some things that apply much more generally to maybe any Jhana or Jhana practice in general. So as I said at the beginning, the teachings will progress if you like through the retreat at the pace that they do, dependent on a lot of factors, partly my medical appointments and things like that. And it's highly unlikely that in fact it's totally undesirable if your practice progresses at the same rate. So at some point you're going to coincide and you may have already done that or maybe later but what we're really interested in is your pace, that's really really important, what's your playground, what's your pace, when is it a maturing or transition time etc. So let me read again as we're very rushed through when I first read them the Buddha's description of the second Jhana of which again there's two, there's a simile and there's a sort of more technical sounding one. Okay so again a practitioner with the subsiding of thinking and pondering, again there's that vitaka, vichara, how different this translation from the usual or more common these days initial and sustained application. That's really the vitaka, vichara, vupassalayam parvi, so this is a fine translation with the subsiding of thinking and pondering by gaining inner tranquility and unity of mind, reaches and remains in the second Jhana which is free from thinking and pondering, born of concentration and filled with delight and happiness. Again filled with pity and sukkah actually, so this person's translating pity as delight. Actually I think maybe even done it the other way, it doesn't matter, it's with the subsiding of vitaka, vichara by gaining inner tranquility and unity of mind, reaches and remains in the second Jhana which is characterized by it free from thinking and pondering, free from vitaka and vichara, born of concentration and filled with pity and sukkah. I will read another translation just so you get a sense of, so he's described the practitioner going through the first Jhana and then said furthermore, more than that, with the stilling of directed thought and evaluation. Again so here's quite a different translation of vitaka and vichara with the stilling of vitaka and vichara, directed thought and evaluation, however we're going to translate vitaka and vichara. She enters and remains in the second Jhana, rapture and pleasure, pity and sukkah, so again let's just go with these words, pity and sukkah. I'm going to translate sukkah as happiness and I'll come back to that. Pity and sukkah, born of composure, that's interesting. The actual Pali word is samadhi, so which the first person has translated as concentration and this person has translated as composure. As I said I would translate samadhi as quite a broad term, it's unification, it's harmonization, it's the agreement of the elements of being, right? Different, born of samadhi, a unification of awareness, free from directed thought and evaluation, free of vitaka and vichara, internal assurance. She permeates and pervades, suffuses and fills this very body with the rapture, sorry with the pity and sukkah born of composure, born of samadhi, there is nothing of her entire body unpervaded by pity and sukkah born of samadhi. So there's a few other elements in here that we need to, so basically the vitaka and vichara fade and born of the samadhi is pity and sukkah which is then spread, that's all we've got as a description. There's a couple of other things that it's born of samadhi, so it's born of samadhi is distinguishing it from the first jhana where the Buddha said is born from withdrawal from the hindrances or seclusion from the hindrances. So this is born of samadhi and remember how rich that term samadhi is, how wide for me at least, hopefully for you. It's this unification of awareness, the Pali is chhita so eko dibhavam, the chhita, the chhita unified or raised to oneness, it's unified. And then this word at the end we'll come back to later, ajatam sampasadhanam, internal assurance this person has, sometimes you hear the word confidence, internal confidence. So we'll come back to that actually later. So experi- that's what we have from the suttas and then we have two, we have a gorgeous simile, I find it gorgeous, just as a lake fed by a spring with no inflow from east, west, north or south, where the rain god sends moderate showers from time to time, the water welling up from below mingling with cool water would suffuse, fill and irradiate that cool water so that no part of the pool was untouched by it. So would this pity and sukka born of samadhi, the practitioner so suffuses their body that no spot remains untouched. So we're talking about a very hot climate where that kind of image is going to be super, super appealing, unlike Devon in December. So to me that's a lovely, lovely image and I feel very much as you get more into the jhanas some of these similes that they actually seem more accurate than the more technical sounding descriptions which are open to all kinds of sort of ambiguities over translations and terms and what they might have meant at one historical period and then another. Just to me there's something much more accurate about the poetic translation than there is about the about what sounds more technical and the kind of descriptions and languages and there are these five factors and there are these three factors and we tend to think oh that must be the really accurate one but you'll see how you do with it. See what you gravitate towards, what opens, what you learn as time goes on. So this is the descriptions we have, they're pretty brief. Again as I think I mentioned, was it yesterday that or another time, when a new territory, when the mind opens into a new realm, a new territory, a new level, it tends to experience that level as effortless at first. It's just whoa we're suddenly not in Kansas anymore, we're suddenly what is this and you're just going along with the ride it feels like and it's effortless and wonderful. There's always exceptions, always exceptions but it tends to be that that's the case. Then at times after that, after those first few experiences where it's all just effortlessly kind of happening and you're almost just a bewitched witness of the whole experience, then it might be that at times the relationship with the second Jhana matures and so that at times we're actually practicing, we're conscious of it's not effortless anymore, I need to actually practice tuning to this frequency of happiness which at times may be super obvious and kind of blow your socks off remarkable like wow and other times much more subtle and maybe not so remarkable. I need to practice tuning to that and steadying my attention on what is essentially a more refined object, the sukha is more refined than the piti. As I mentioned, the Jhanas are not primarily a spectrum of stronger and stronger concentration. The eighth Jhana is invariably a state of more immovability of mind than the fourth Jhana or the seventh Jhana or whatever. That's not necessarily the case, that's not the primary thing that's changing, it might be happen at that time but it might just happen completely otherwise at different times. But rather the Jhanas are primarily a spectrum of increasing refinement let's say, increasing refinement and where there's a bit of ambiguity between subtlety and refinement. So let's choose the word refinement for the way that this cloth is a lot more coarse and less refined than this cloth. So the texture of it is much more refined. They're primarily a spectrum of deeper and more and more refinement, they get more and more refined. Technically and we'll come back to this, there's a reason for that, it's because they're also a spectrum of less and less fabrication. On the spectrum of the fabrication of perception, if you've never heard that term before I'll explain it in more detail later on. This is really, really central and it's really, really important to understand that in general, I would say in terms of understanding what the Dharma is, where we're going, what emptiness means, what dependent arising means, what liberation means, key concept. The Jhanas too map onto that very key central concept because the Jhanas too in their spectrum of more and more refinement are also, you could say, places or areas on a spectrum of less and less fabrication. It's like this coarse cloth has almost like more material to it, it's thicker and denser and this fine cloth has got less material to it, it's thinner and there's more filaments. So we're actually fabricating less as we go deeper and deeper into Jhanas. We may or may not be aware of that but to become conscious of it and to understand it and understand its implications is huge, is massive. In a way, I would say we don't really understand what the Jhanas are, we really understand how they relate to insight practice or how they integrate into the whole practice and we don't really understand what we're doing when we're practicing concentration. We don't really understand that until we understand this and its relation to the whole notion of the fabrication of perception and fabricates more or less at different times. How? How does that happen and what happens when we fabricate more or less? We will come back to that. However, having said all that, in the second Jhana we've just got born of Samadhi. So there is, I think it's true to say that usually a state of second Jhana is an improvement of concentration on the first Jhana usually. But that Samadhi again, it's a wider word, unification, harmonization, etc. A wider word than it usually gets translated as just concentration, I would say. It may be that a practitioner is still at this point staying with their breath. The breath is the primary object and the PT has come up and they're really mixing that with the breath and getting into that and then the happiness comes up. One can if one wants to stay with the breath or the metta might be the base practice and one can if one wants to stay with the metta. But what happens is or what should happen is they get mixed. It must feel at some point that I am breathing happiness or the breath has become happiness or the metta has become happiness. I am radiating out sukha and happiness or the body has become happiness. The Buddha says no part of the body left unpervaded by this sukha and PT. You have the option of keeping with the breath if that's your base practice and you want to and that's what helps or keeping with the metta. But it should integrate those primary, those base practice, the sense of the base practice objects, the metta or the breath should completely integrate with the happiness. Like I said, they just become happiness. Or you can like described with the first jhana, you can make the happiness the primary object and what you're primarily paying attention to and then the breath or the metta may support that a little bit or it's just gone. You're really not concerned with it and you have a bodily, we'll come back to this, a body sense of happiness, an emotional sense of happiness and that's what you're concentrating on. If I think I threw this out already, if we were just all to take a sort of school trip to Newton-Abbot and each one of us were to stop someone on the street and say, think of something that makes you happy and then can you concentrate on that happiness, I doubt, I think most people would just be baffled and it would feel impossible or very, very difficult. So for most of us, actually happiness as an object to focus on and to steady the mind to and to tune to is actually something we never do and we wouldn't know how to do and we wouldn't be able to do. So we're training that, we have to train that. We're not, as I said, concentrating so much on a spatial point, we're concentrating, if you like, on that frequency or that bandwidth of frequencies which is happiness. That's really what we're doing. Within that, within our intention to do that and our playing with that, there may be times when the attention is really steady and really focusing on a spatial point but that spatial point is happiness or it's the center of the happiness. So again, what we're really doing is focusing on the happiness and that's central. Rather than thinking of concentration as a focus on a spatial point, it may be at times that that's what's helpful and at other times that's not what's helpful. You let go of the sense of the spatial point being so important and it's the frequency. So this word sukkha, S-U-K-K-H-A in Pali, it's an emotional quality, the emotion of happiness and again, I mean that word in quite a broad way. So technically in Buddhist psychology, it's a chitta quality, it's a quality of the heart and mind. However, it's also physical and this we really want to emphasize. You feel it as much in the body and you need to feel it in the body. This is why partly the person, Nute Naba, wherever we're going, won't be able to do it because it's just an extremely ephemeral, extremely wispy mental quality. They can't locate it in their body so feeling it in the body, pervading the body with it is exactly partly what enables us to really get into it and really stabilize with it. When I say in the body, I mean in the energy body, in the whole space, in the vibration tone. It becomes happiness. The vibration tone of the energy body space becomes happiness. So at the beginning, at first when you open to this level, either the second jhana or just the emergence of the sukha, identifying it as an emotion is for most people actually quite a crucial distinction to make. The piti is a primarily physical quality. The sukha is an emotion. Just making that distinction, although because of what I just said, it's actually not quite true. They're both energy body vibrations. They're different energy body vibrations. It will really help you make the distinction, get a sense of the different playgrounds, get a sense of the territory, and actually build the whole thing if you recognize it and feel it as an emotional quality as well. That's what's going to really start to distinguish it from the piti. So that identifying it as an emotional quality versus a primarily physical quality, which the piti, we could regard the piti as. The piti isn't just that either. Again, it's not this black and white, but sometimes making things black and white is actually really helpful at a certain stage to make things clearer. Is it the ultimate truth? Definitely not, but just making that division at first is really helpful. It will help to draw it out of the mix, to draw out that emotional quality of sukha from the mix. Ah, this is the emotion. Ah, that's what I'm paying attention to at first. To begin to distinguish, this is piti, this is sukha. You really need to taste it, which really means feel it in the body and feel the different qualities and enjoy them quite a few times, perhaps, to really get used to this. At first, it might be very, very obvious. If the second janu just explodes out of the first, it's very obvious. I mean completely different territory now. But again, as time goes on, there might be like a hold on a minute. Where's the division here? This distinguishing, this making discernment is actually really, again, what we're talking about when I emphasize sensitivity, attunement, discernment, it's all really key. Not just a jhana practice, what we said right at the beginning, to the quality of your relationship with your own emotions and your wisdom with your own emotions, your sensitivity to all kinds of things in life, your capacity in relationship, the skill you can work with in emptiness practice and soul making practice and brahma vihara practice. That's why we emphasized it. I would say that, or rather a lot of people say, and I agree with them, that as the Buddha says, Piti and Sukkha are both present in the first jhana and they're both present in the second jhana. But what's characteristic of the first jhana is that the Piti is to the fore. We're kind of entranced by that more and maybe there's more of it in the mix. And then in the second jhana, that flips and the Sukkha becomes prominent over the Piti. Piti is still there, but the Sukkha becomes prominent. And the Sukkha is our primary nimitta, whereas in the first jhana, the Piti was the primary nimitta. So Karen asked me, is that not in the Pali Canon? No, I've never seen it in the Pali Canon. I mean, it might be somewhere. I very much doubt it, but I don't think so. Maybe it's in a commentary somewhere? I'm not sure. So when I say that, I'm speaking from the teachers that I have really trusted and who have taught me jhana practice or from whom I've learned jhana practice and from my own experience. And it's just that that's pretty clear. Is it in the Pali Canon? Don't think so. We get these very brief descriptions as we go into the further jhanas, the descriptions are even briefer. So we have to somehow discern and get a sense of what the territory is. But as I said, I think I've already said it twice and I say it once more, then this back to this distinguishing between Piti and Sukhra, really making that distinction. What can happen if we don't is this kind of stagnation. It's the discernment that takes us deeper. It's the sensitivity to change that takes us deeper on the whole path, deeper on the jhana path in a full way. And again, I know people, I know practitioners sit a lot, etc., did sit a lot, put a lot of work in and they reach a kind of place that's sort of around this area. And it's a kind of a mix and they do not either they do not take the instruction or they do not bother to make the differentiation. And it's 20 years later and they're still pretty much hovering around in the same kind of soup. That might be completely fine with them or they might want something different but they're not going to open up anywhere deeper unless they make the distinctions, the discriminations, the subtle discriminations. It's nice where they are and they can sit for quite a while, etc., but it hasn't gone anywhere and not much even new insight. So it doesn't just apply to the depth of samadhi practice, it applies to the insight practice as well. That all got stagnated as well. It's because I don't know why they didn't want to make the discernment. Maybe it was, I don't know, why do people, it's a whole other question. Sometimes though they're a mix, the piti and the sukara mix and it's hard to tell at the beginning. But there will be, if you're new to the second journey, there will be times where I'm not quite sure. But generally speaking, we want to be clear. This is piti and this is sukha. And generally speaking, they do kind of separate like that. But there will be times when it's actually quite hard to tell. All that means is that part of the work and or play, depending on your favorite word there, part of the work and play at this stage is exactly that. That's part of your job. Can I really get used to what the differences are? Can I make the discriminations? That's really part of the work. So how does the second jhana arise? Well what color is an unripe mango? Is it green? What color is a ripe mango? Is it kind of yellow red? But let's say it's more yellow red. So one of my, Ajahn Jeff used to say, don't take a green unripe mango and paint it yellow red and then call that a ripe mango. Don't take your practice wherever it is and try and do some stuff and call that the second jhana. Don't take your first jhana and push it or put pressure on it or just do something that you're kind of forcing a mango to ripen. So his approach was very much on that these things will ripen in their own time. And if you do it that way, rather than kind of jumping the gun or forcing anything or wanting to achieve something or having some kind of timetable, it will be much, much more fruitful. Again, generally speaking, there's all kinds of exceptions and I'll come back to some of those exceptions. So again, we talked about, remember when we talked about PT, we said generally speaking, you could say there's two ways that PT arises. One is I take an object, maybe it's a point in the abdomen or the breath or the nostrils if it's the breath, maybe I take the matter, whatever it is, and I just work with that, work with that, work with that. I do not put up with the hindrances when they come. I really try and work with the hindrances and I have this background awareness and I play with this idea of more intense attention, less intense attention, delicacy of attention, subtleizing the attention. If I do all that, those four things, then the way the PT tends to arise is sudden and eruptive and quite strong after, for most people, quite a while. So that's good. And then there's another way which is taking the energy body experience from the beginning and actually just kind of tending to the little ember of well-being there, fanning it when it needs fanning, protecting it when it needs protection from the winds, et cetera, building in a way, coaxing it to become more of a campfire, the PT. But that needs work and play, playing with the modes of attention, playing with kind of very intense probing at times or intense attention, intense opening, radical opening, receiving, et cetera. So I have to be intense. I can't at times at least. I have to be intense with how I'm coaxing this ember. Sometimes my, let's say, my intention and my attention and my whole work and play has to be quite intense without putting pressure or a demand on it. So that's also part of the whole deal. When we get to the second John and this happiness, it might be the case, as I said, that it probably relies more on its arising in a way that's helpful. It probably relies more on a really very gratifying relationship with the PT. The PT, one is really into it and really enjoying it. So if the PT's okay and it's okay and then a bit like, maybe the second John would be better. That goes back to the foolish, inexperienced cow. Remember that? So I have to... What does this mean here? It means then that, again, with the PT that's arisen, I have to work and play with that in these ways. I actually have to shape it. I need to really take care of it and take care of my relationship to it. The sukkah of the second John will only arise when I do that. So if it matures, if the sukkah of the second John matures organically like this mango, it emerges through working and playing with the PT, then it... and through the PT feeling really lovely, really pleasurable, really enjoyable, then the sukkah emerges in a much clearer way. It's like, well, this really is... Okay, this really is something else now. Now this is really something quite extraordinary. This is clearly what that word sukkah means. It's clearly the second John or whatever, depending on where you end up. After that, to say in different words what I said earlier, after a few times of that, then you might find yourself needing to... In other words, after quite a bit of experience with the second John, then you might find yourself needing to go back and you can work with a much more subtle and unremarkable sukkah and build it up the way we build up the ember of wellbeing into PT. Does this make sense what I'm saying? It's like if I've got a PT that's not that great, then my chances of getting... Taking a happiness that's... It's okay. Building it into the second John are probably... Probably, there's always exceptions, and I'd be really interested if there are actually to hear back just for teaching purposes, but it's more likely that the happiness that comes when the PT wasn't that remarkable and then the sukkah is not that remarkable, it will be hard to get that to feel really gratifying and like this is really something. Versus the PT that can arise with patience and time from just working with the ember and the energy body can be. Does this make sense, the distinction? Not quite. With the PT, we can go two ways. I take an object, I stick with it, but I have to be careful how I'm sticking with it and be intense and watch it be subtle with the attention and delicacy and all that. I can do that, or I can just take the ember of well-being and the energy body and build it and build it and build it. I can get either of two ways to a PT that's really nice. When you come to the second Jhana, I'm just wondering whether the probability of coming to a sukkah, which is characteristic of the second Jhana that's really nice, is not an equal probability. I can't start from a happiness that's not really that gratifying, especially if that was built on a PT that never got really that gratifying. It's probably possible, but at first it's unlikely. At the PT, I have to get really into the PT, I have to really get that fine, really enjoy it and then it's more likely to succeed. After a lot of experience with the sukkah and the second Jhana, then you can take a really quite unremarkable happiness and you're already quite skilled and it's already quite familiar and that can grow. I'm sure I could have said that more. Having said all that, sometimes what happens, sometimes what I encounter in teaching is someone whose first Jhana is just great and they're even getting all the elements of mastery. It's usually the case that as a person really starts to gain those elements of mastery through practice with the first Jhana, that the second Jhana is already intruding, emerging, showing itself. That's usually the case. Occasionally, or sometimes, I don't know what proportion of times, someone's first Jhana, they're really enjoying it, they're really into it and there is some of those elements of mastery but the second Jhana is not showing. It's not emerging, etc. Sometimes, this is not how Ajahn Jai-Fu teaches, you never paint that mango at all or you never force a ripening. Obviously, sometimes there's some things that you could do, little tricks you can play with. One is, here's the PT, I'm really used to it, I'm really into it, it's going great. Right now, it's going great. Generally, I'm into it, I've practiced with it, etc. I've gotten used to all that, all the mastery, or a lot of the mastery. Right now, it's going great in this sitting, walking, standing, whatever it is. When it's going great, I can just drop a question, just a really light question, what is the emotion right now? What's the emotion I'm feeling right now? The answer should be happiness, it should be sukha, so that's one possibility. The second possibility, again, here it is, going quite well. Again, this is something that it doesn't need to be going well, after a while, after a lot of practice, it doesn't need to be going well for this one to work. Let's say, at the beginning, when it's not quite happening, here I am, and I drop in the word, whichever word I prefer, a whisper, a grain of magic, alchemical, chemical, just drop it in, a drop into the chitta, happiness, or joy, or sukha, or whatever word is that you prefer. As I said, the mind goes deeper in the mind, it just becomes more and more suggestive, and potently so. More and more sensitive the mind becomes, sensitive to suggestion, sensitive becomes more malleable in all kinds of ways. That would be a second. Another funny thing you can try is, you've probably noticed that most often PT tends to flow upwards in the body, one feels a sort of upward current of it. What you can try sometimes is just feel that upward current, again this is when you're really used to it, and it's great, and you're enjoying it, and then the upward current, imagine it shooting out the top of your head like a fountain, like a spout of a fountain, the water comes out the top of your head, and then like a fountain it falls back down. Just imagine that, see what happens. A fourth possibility, I'm not sure how much one might want to try this, or how we'll see, but it may well be very useful for some people at some times. Again, here's the PT, it's going well, I'm into my practice right now, and just the memory, introduce again, very, very subtle, just the memory of something that makes you happy, or a happiness, just like a little tincture, a little drop of tincture into the chitta, the memory of a happiness, while the PT is there, drop that in. These are all little tricks, in a way, the safest gamble is to let something mature, and just get really, really into the PT, find that enjoyment, find that intensity of relationship with the PT, so don't confuse intensity with this kind of forward probing narrowing, that's one form of intensity, another form is how intensely am I opening, but an intensely enjoyable relationship with the PT, and it matures out of that in time. If not, or if you feel like, well, I'm kind of, or if the teacher says, okay, maybe you want to try one of those tricks, if you're playing enough, you will discover your own tricks at this point, at this threshold, at this border between the first and second jhana, you should discover your own tricks, and come and share them with us, because there's all kinds of things are possible, eventually, you won't need any tricks, because you're going to be, hopefully, you have mastered the second jhana, which means you just have the subtle intention for the second jhana, or for the sukkah to arise, and it goes there, and all the tricks, it's like I can't even remember the tricks I've learned, I used to play with, this was all I could come up with, because I couldn't remember, so after a while one just doesn't need them, it's just from intention, but there is that point of learning new territory, where you will be like, well, it's gone there before, and how do I get it back, or if it needs a nudging, yeah. Okay, so, going back to something I mentioned earlier, there's this phrase there, in Pli it's a vitaka-vitra-nam-vipassana, which means something like with the subsiding, with the allaying, with the cessation, with the calming of vitaka-vitra, what, thinking, thinking about, initial and sustained application, that doesn't, that begins to not make much sense at this point. So, what is that? First of that, it's part of that characteristic here. Vichra, that word also has a particular meaning sometimes, so it's used as a pair, vitaka-vitra just means thinking, vichra has a particular meaning of kind of discursive thought, thinking, it's like, what I mean by that is, the mind getting hooked on a thought and following a thought, and one, so for more than one moment, so this thought leads to that thought, or I'm following a train of thought, this is discursive thinking. So discursive in English comes from the Latin corare, which means to run, to move, to move fastly. The mind is in a certain, you understand, it's hooked and it's moved. Does that make sense? The mind is moved with a thought. One thought follows another, so when we reason, this, therefore that, therefore the next thing, that's also, in English, that's also discursive thought, that's also one of the meanings of discursive thought, it's a consequential movement of thought. I would say that if you're careful enough in your attention, if you're sensitive enough in your attention, you will notice in the second Jhana that it may be that thought arises at times. This citta, this citta which has infinite depth and subtlety, it may be that thought arises at times, but what there isn't in the second Jhana is any being hooked to a thought. The mind is not then moved off on a thought. One thought does not lead to a second thought. This follows that, or I was thinking this, and then, and the kind of thought that arises is probably very, very wispy, very, very subtle, it's not extended in time either. So there's a larger point here, I think, just about, in addition to mapping out what actually is the range of experience of the second Jhana, and there's a larger, perhaps even equally important points. What is it to have a thought? We use that word so much, I'm thinking, or there was thought, or there wasn't thought. I would say the whole idea of thought, and the whole experience of thought has an enormous range to it, to the mind shouting something and completely lost in a tangle of shouting at itself or whatever it is, and very coarse thoughts, to extremely, extremely subtle, the kind of subtlety that most people wouldn't even notice, and we're not used to, we're not even aware that, oh, there might be this level there. So an invitation alongside all this to open up that investigation, to pay attention and notice what do we mean when we say thought, and what does it mean when the mind gets quiet? Is it completely quiet? Is it quiet at a certain level? What kind of thoughts have gone? What kind of relationship with thought has gone? What has gone is that being hooked onto a thought, or for more than being hooked onto a thought, and one thought hooking us to the next, one thought being hooked to the next, that's gone, and also gross thought has gone. So again, this is the sort of thing, it may take a while to notice this, and I really mean, again, this is also again why I keep, and sorry to anyone who doesn't like this, but why subtlety and sensitivity is such an important part for me in the teaching. One begins to realize, oh, these things are not so black and white, and there's way more subtlety of range for most phenomena than we tend to realize at first, and we can develop our sensitivity and get aware of that range of subtlety, and that pays enormous dividends. So all this business about what is thought actually has huge implications for very, very deep insight. People talk about non-conceptual awareness, and the mind was completely non-conceptual, etc. So what's the difference between a conception and a thought, and does a conception have to be verbal? Does a thought have to be verbal? I need to notice all this for the really deep end of insight, when you're talking about really deep, unfabricating, or understandings of emptiness and the way certain words are used in text and stuff like that, but we won't talk about that now. So like I said, it may take a while to notice this. In a way, what happens with the samadhi of the second jhana is partly what enables us, or should enable us to do this, is to begin to notice this a little bit. As I said, whenever it was, usually at first, a new level, when the mind enters a new level, it's like a dam bursting, and the water is just gushing, and you're just going along for this water ride, and it just seems like there's no thought happening. In time, it's like your eyes getting used to a darkened room. You say, oh, hold on a minute. There are some things here I didn't notice at first, but we're talking about something very, very subtle, and a whole different relationship, a whole different level of thought. So you don't need to go, well, let's see that. But this encouragement I said, how wise would it be to use my perception of the presence or absence of thought as a kind of measurement of where I am in samadhi? And I keep kind of glancing there, does it stop thinking yet? I don't think that would be very helpful or very wise at all. But given, A, the confusion of what vitakam vichara means, and B, the subtlety of the range of what thinking might be, I can't see that much value. You will notice something in relation to thought if you're really getting into this. So don't make that the primary criterion. So I would like to say, as I said before, each jhana has a primary nimitta, right? And the second jhana, the primary nimitta is sukha. That's the thing that we're really making primary and really getting into, and we're really taking care of, and we're really opening our relationship with, et cetera, and getting into. So there's a, what's significant in practice? But there's a, why is that the significant? Why are we making that the significant thing in practice? Some may be, I would be very surprised if there aren't people out there with the idea that the most significant thing about the second jhana is the quieting, the stilling of thought. I don't know. Maybe there are. So again, we have to think, why do I choose this to make this an emphasis over that? Of all the things I could emphasize in practice right now, of all the things I could make a priority, why this and not that, or why that and not this? Remember we were talking about this, that how I think about samadhi and how I relate to samadhi in the present moment is related to my big view. Yes? Are you guys okay today? Yeah? Whether you're okay? Or, yes. Yes, okay, good. Thank you. So, we apply that here. Here's this bag of little factors. Which is the most significant one and why? So I'm going to choose the sukkah as the most significant one. Maybe there's someone who chooses the less thought as the most significant one. So I would say the quietening of thought is not the most significant or transformative aspect or factor. It's actually an absence of a factor here, isn't it? The absence of two factors that were present in the first jhana. I would say that's not the most transformative factor or aspect of the second jhana. I would say happiness is. It's the happiness. It's the sukkah. It's the range of happiness. It's the remarkability of that happiness. It's the fact that it comes pretty much independent of someone needing to praise me or some sense pleasure or something. These are the things that transform. If and only if I really marinate in it and I really drink it lots and lots of times for a long time, then that happiness is really, really going to make a difference in one's life. A huge difference. As a resource, we've talked about this before, tremendous resource. Just imagine several hours a day just drinking that kind of happiness, that depth of happiness, that beauty of happiness. In half an hour a day, whatever it is, after a while just knowing it's there and that you can access it if you want it. The sense of what's possible, this is also really transformed by the tasting of that happiness. One's ability to let go. That's part of the function of a resource in dharma. This lovely, lovely feeling means it doesn't so much matter how much money I have or this or that if I get famous, if I get rich, if the food is nice where I'm staying or not nice or pleasant. It's completely relativized by that kind of experience. One's ability to let go is made much more vast, much more steady, much more profound, much more wide reaching because of the happiness. It's the happiness I said that's pretty much independent of what someone is giving me or sense pleasures, etc. It's massive. The difference only if we marinate for a long period of time with the happiness is what I'm drinking, I'm drinking, I'm drinking, I'm drinking, I'm drinking that, slaking the thirst for what we're really looking for, chasing the sense pleasures or the praise or whatever it is. I'm going to leave soul making dharma and sensing the soul completely out of this conversation for now because some of you know that that gets a lot more interesting and there's a lot more to say there but I'm just leaving it out for now, not to complicate things. If though I decide to say or to take, oh no, it's the quietening of thought, that's the most significant thing about the second dharma. My question would be why? Why do you think that's and how can you explain how that fits into and makes more sense in a bigger picture? Is it that you believe that when the mind is free of thought it's seeing things as they really are or revealing its thought that is the problem and the thought creates this kind of smokescreen in front of reality or what is or whatever language. Do you understand? When I bring in text like how does it fit? What actually is most significant and why if I'm choosing to emphasize this or if a person is choosing to emphasize that, why is that significant and how is that significant A for jhana practice, B for what it's going to deliver and C in the whole path? Sometimes what happens in practice is that, again I don't know the figures of how common this is but I've certainly encountered it quite a few times. So a person is in the first dharma, great, and then they just completely leapfrog the second dharma and end up in the third dharma. That's the next thing that just emerges by itself. So that's quite an interesting thing. Again maybe we have to think back to where are we trying to go and in this way of setting up where we want eventually to have mastery of the second dharma too then it would be a question of okay do we need to stop now and go back or should we let the third mature and really get into that and then go back but it's possible. But it may also skip to, we had this with for example Joel's question, well it wasn't exactly that question, but the possibility of it skipping or moving from the first dharma to a peacefulness that is not really akin to the third dharma. It's peaceful, it's relatively still, there's some equanimity there. It's certainly not unpleasant, but it's not really the third dharma. So again partly depends on background practice, partly depends on one's psychological patterns. For some people there's a kind of resistance to a sort of intense happiness for whatever reasons or however that came to be as a sort of karmic formation or sankara. And so sometimes that needs a little unpacking or the relationship with happiness and sort of bubbly happiness needs a little looking at. But eventually we want to tick them all off in terms of mastery. We could say that each jhana kind of delivers its particular insight. We could say something like that, but more accurately because each jhana delivers something particular in relation to the ability to let go. And that's anyway what I would translate insight as. Insight is, has to be directly related with letting go. Insight is what allows letting go. So the first jhana, people are different, whatever, but it might just be the fact that like, wow, a whole other realm is possible. I think I said this already. Other states, other states of consciousness, other dimensions are possible when the mind is not entangled. And just that knowledge, that first hand intimate experience and the way, the intensity with which it impresses on consciousness is something completely different than we have experienced before. It's a big difference for a lot of people. Not for everyone, but for a lot of people it will. With the second jhana, it's related to this happiness and this, I think. There is this, like I said, in the Buddha's very short description, there's just two words there, ajatam passadhanam. And it translates to something like internal confidence or internal assurance. But I think I was talking with you, with you, Harbao, this last night. It's actually to me that the confidence could mean three things, one of three things or two or three of three things. It could mean right then in that moment because of the stability of the citta, it's born out of samadhi and because of the stilling of thought and the sense of how integrated it is, it could be a confidence in the stability of the citta then. And that, instead of having to, like with the first jhana, the soap mixer is doing it quite active and the vitaka and the vichara, and I'm thinking more and more, it's just kind of more still. And there's a kind of confidence from that in the stability, like I'm confident that this is stable, maybe. It could be a confidence that has more to do with the discovery, like I said, of such a profound and fulfilling happiness that doesn't seem, let's say, certainly not primarily dependent on external conditions. Just knowing that, tasting that, drinking from it, that's going to give one quite a bit of confidence in one's life. Do you get that? Or it could be. I don't actually know what it's referring to, it's just sort of there, hanging in a mid-sentence. It could be a confidence in the dharma and a confidence in one's own ability to tread the path that the Buddha described. One really has a sense, it's like, wow, here I am, 2500 years later, experiencing these remarkable experiences that the Buddha described, and he's got them in a kind of spectrum, and he describes this other stuff. If I'm experiencing this, and it has such an intimate sense of this really is what we're talking about, then one's confidence in the dharma itself and in one's ability to tread the path gets quite a support there. Maybe I can do more. If I can do this, I can do more, and all the way to liberation. I don't know which of those confidences it is, but confidence is part of the gift, and certainly the confidence of that resort, that's the one I would plumb to as the primary one, but plumb for as the primary one. But I think maybe they're all there. Actually, I remember, if I remember back, the confidence it gave me in the path, and that I was actually walking this path, and that it was possible, and what the Buddha was talking about was really, it makes such an impact, much more impact than just being mindful and being a little calmer or whatever it is, or seeing impermanence and saying, oh, the Buddha talked about it. It makes such an impact because of the beauty and the depth and the remarkably of the experience. It really gave me a lot of confidence in the path, and I was on the path, and that I could do that because, look, I'm doing it. I feel it. I think probably, for me, the most important one is the discovery of this kind of happiness that we have access to this kind of happiness. It's open to us, and it's not dependent on external conditions. So I mentioned earlier that probably when we're talking about the first Jhana, that each Jhana has a primary nimitta in our language and a secondary nimitta. I think I just gave one, I'm not sure how many examples I gave of a secondary nimitta in the first Jhana, the primary nimitta is PT. In the second Jhana, the primary nimitta is sukha. In the first Jhana, for example, or any Jhana, you could have a secondary nimitta of, say, a bright white light in the mind or a cloud of light, that sort of thing. You could also, for some people, it's aural. They hear a sound or a sound or whatever it is. There can be different ones. Those two are probably the most common. But there's also a kind of other kinds of secondary nimitta which are a little bit more, let's say, intrinsically important or valuable. One of them is quite common at this stage, the second Jhana, and then in a way even more more differently so, let's say, in the third Jhana, is that metta is there. So that sometimes people are not doing a metta practice. I'm just working on the breath and now it's open to the second Jhana. Actually feel, sometimes people have come to me and say, I think the metta is the primary thing, not the happiness. It's not technically, it's a secondary nimitta, but it's very valuable. Automatically in a Jhana there is metta in it. It's kind of impossible to be in a Jhana and have ill will or aversion and the opposite of metta. It's more, again, back to what will I become sensitive to? What can I pick up on? What's in the mix of frequencies here? These are especially noticeable in different flavors in the second and third Jhanas. We can allow that. Sometimes you can focus more on that. You can lean your emphasis more into the metta there. Again, it's the dialer. How much does it become completely primary? Does it become 50-50? Does it become just in the background? There can be for a lot of people, obviously a lot of healing, a lot of healing with the love that's there, particularly when we talk about the third Jhana, but a lot of healing. We need to be clear what's the primary nimitta and that's the sukha, that's the happiness, so that not leaning too much and too often and too long into the love over the stretch of our practice. Why would metta come up at that point? Why would metta reveal itself, do you think? What's that? While saying, because they're both unfabricated. If I say that slightly differently, if that's okay. When we're in the Jhana, we're not fabricating, so I'm introducing more of this conversation about fabrication, teaching about fabrication. When we're in a Jhana, and more and more so as we go down the Jhana, we're fabricating less and less self and less and less of any kind of otherness, other person or whatever, so that the duality between self and other gets less. There's more sense of non-separation, more oneness. There's less like, that's your space and this is my space, thank you very much, or whatever it is, or less judging or less irritation. There's just a tendency, self and other, both less fabricated, more non-separateness, less duality there, less polarity and all that and all the difficulties. In a way, there's a kind of natural arising of metta because of that, because we're just, we feel less separate. Afterwards, even the metta gets unfabricated, but we'll talk about that later. That's why we get into equanimity and things, we'll talk about that later. If you're practicing in this territory, so when you're practicing, when this territory opens up for you, and it feels like, okay, now that's my playground and that's what I'm really exploring and you're really into it and you've, let's say, just spent a standing period in the second Jana, whatever it is, and it's time to end because you have to go to wash up or whatever. You know it's coming up time to end, but it's still going well and there's still energy there. Then you can spend a few minutes, if you want, just a few minutes at the end of the session, playing what I call two games, ping pong and leap frog. For example, here I am in the second Jana and then I go, okay, well let's go to just a normal consciousness. I'm leap frogging the first Jana, yeah? Then I go maybe, okay, I'll go from there to one and then I'll go from one back to two and then I'll go from two back to one and then I'll go to two again. Then I'm ping ponging, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two. I actually need to practice that transition both ways. This is a minor part of our practice, but one of the elements of mastery. Can I really just move back and forth at ease between any Jana and its adjacent Jana? If I'm practicing two, can I go to one and I haven't got to three yet, then two to one, to two, to one, to two. It's all very light. It's all just a game. Then I can also practice leap frog. Here there's not too many leap frog options because we've only got zero, one, and two. We can go two to zero to two. There's not much leap frog options. You can just spend a few minutes of fun at the end of sitting playing ping pong and leap frog. These are the elements of mastery. They're really, again, I would like to encourage this. I wouldn't spend a whole sitting doing this, but they're part of learning the territory. They're part of the discrimination. They're part of the mastery. They're part of what makes the mind and the chitta really malleable and all that. Again, when we come to talking about mastery, etc., we have to think about pacing. When is it not ripe yet to try this stuff? I'm just getting used to the second genre. It's too soon to try going for a walk in the second genre when I'm just getting used to it. I need to be really, really familiar. When I do try all that stuff, like the whole practice and the whole tenor of the days here, we really want to encourage this kind of light playfulness. If I get too heavy and too tight and too pressured, it just squeezes the sukkah out of things, and then there won't be the fruit. The whole thing is very light when it's time to play. I don't know where things are at in the Dharma world these days. I don't get out much. It's actually true. But certainly, if I think back years ago, I don't know. Maybe this is a question for you. Who's heard from anywhere? Careful with the Jhanas, there's a danger you might get attached. Some years ago, this would have been everyone. It would have been the default. You don't really want to be, A, what's the point? It's not insight. B, there's really a danger there that you're going to get attached. That's really pretty serious. It's interesting, I'm not sure. Maybe two-fifths of the people? I don't know. Anyway, half of you put your hand up. If you go back to what the Buddha said, what did he say about all this? There is one occasion where I remember, and I'm sure that maybe I was wondering, I remember him talking about a monk who then was very ill and because of the low energy, was not able to access whatever level of Jhana he was able before his illness or when he was well. This monk was, I don't know, having some dukkha about that. The Buddha said, it's annata, you see it as annata, both the Jhana and the cell. It's not cell. There's that kind of attachment. What the Buddha mostly said a few times is this, talking about the pleasure of Jhana, and he said this, the pleasure of Jhana, is a pleasure I will allow myself. This is someone who talks about the middle way in terms of renunciation and senses, but basically relative to most of us, he's pretty extreme renunciate. As extreme renunciate this, this is a pleasure I will allow myself. This is a pleasure that should not be feared. This is a pleasure that should be pursued and developed. This is a pleasure that should not be feared. This is a pleasure that should be pursued and developed. When he talks about sense pleasures, he talks about them as a pit of vipers, a pit of upward, those elephant traps, old hunter-gatherers, they've got these big wooden stakes, and the elephant is supposed to, the mammoth is supposed to fall in. That's the sort of image he gives for sense pleasures. It looks like a nice piece of grass or whatever it is there, and actually it's a... He talks about the Jhana in that way, this not to be feared, this is a pleasure I will allow myself, this pleasure should be pursued and developed, and he talks about sense pleasures. There's a whole list of pretty extreme negative similes for sense pleasures. Is it or was it the case that somewhere along the line that modern Dharma teachings have kind of reversed that? Reverse the Buddha's teachings in relation to these kinds of pleasures, sense pleasure and jhanic pleasure, and reverse the Buddha's concerns regarding sense pleasure, jhanic pleasure and attachment to either. I find that really interesting, I mean historically and psychologically and how that may have evolved and why that may have evolved, and it may be changing, I mean it's definitely changing, no question, it's changing. The Buddha's pretty clear about this. Again I don't know if anyone is still unsure when the PT for example feels very sexual or it feels like orgasmic, but again just to remind you, and is that okay and surely it's a bit much or it can't be right, just to remind you again of the Buddha's words that we've heard before describing the Jhana, PT, Sukhya, whole body pervaded leaving no spot untouched. So what he does not say is the whole body pervaded except below the waist and kind of above the middle of the thigh. He says whole body. So I think again this is one of these things, it's very easy, it's changing now, but back to the X number of years it was really quite a pervasive thing about this, you really shouldn't mess with the Jhana, there's a real danger that you'll get attached. Again this can we bring a little intelligence to this, a little questioning. I mean it seems to me that there's three kinds of attachment that are potential in Jhana, with Jhana. So one is attachment to the pleasure, that would be the most obvious one that people would think of, that you're going to get attached to the pleasure. So after, how many years I've been teaching, 16, 17 years, something like that, I honestly struggle to remember one person, one person who had experienced an actual Jhana, let's say more than 10 times, who was attached to the pleasure there. I mean maybe other people are encountering that sort of thing a lot, but I don't think it's a problem for Westerners. I just wonder what would that attachment look like? There's someone who's attached to Jhana, there's like a basement at Gaya House where it's a bit like an opium den and these old yogis are there just like in the dark and getting old and not doing their work. What do we actually think it would look like? Maybe what I think it would look like is then this person who's attached to the Jhana, they're unwilling to explore or investigate the difficult. I think it's extremely rare, I've never encountered it. I really, really sit here struggling to think, okay, is there anyone I can think of? I just can't. After about 10 times of Jhana, you're not going to be attached to the pleasure in any way that's any, well let's say you're not going to be attached to the pleasure in any kind of problematic way. I just can't see that. What I do see and what we might recognize in ourselves much more commonly is an attachment to looking at, obsessing with, prioritizing, attending to the difficult. I mentioned this before and sometimes that's just a psychological tendency, sometimes it's a cultural tendency, sometimes it's a darmically trained tendency. When I have the option of giving equal attention or attention an equal number of times to the pleasant, I find that I can't. I'm so trained. Immediately there's a contraction in the body, immediately there's some dukkha that the mind goes there. That's great, that willingness is great, but if it's not balanced with an equal freedom and willingness the other side, there's actually effectively an attachment. Sometimes that attachment is ideological because a person thinks, well this is where the real stuff is and what's happening in a jhana is you're actually suppressing that or hiding it. But that's what's dukkha is what's real. A jhana is a fabrication. A jhana is a kind of construction or a reality or you're stepping out of touch hiding from the real stuff. This is again, we talk about how common attachments are and how entrenched attachments are. That can be extremely common and extremely entrenched. Sometimes as a teacher over the years I have to be really, really delicate and careful how I bring that sort of point up and what I say to people and how I might say it. Or so it could be an ideological attachment, it could just be a habitual. It's just habitual again, just tendency of personality, tendency of culture, upbringing, or tendency of dharma practice. In a way then, practicing the jhanas and doing that wholeheartedly and being open minded will actually remedy that opposite attachment which doesn't even occur to people that it might be an attachment because I'm practicing that. Let's not buy into that view. Let's not get sucked into the difficult. Let's go here. I want to keep them both open and both I'm really able to do both. I'm really free to do both. That's where we want to get to, range, possibility. What seems to me a second way of getting attached to the jhanas is to get all like, look at me what I can do. I can reach this or that jhana and there's a kind of grandiosity of self view. Then I would say, let's say after 20 times of a certain jhana, it should be really obvious to a person that it's not self making it happen. It arises this jhana when the conditions are there. When the conditions are there, a jhanic experience, a jhanic perception arises. It depends on the conditions, all kinds of conditions. All kinds. I mentioned that monk. He also says at some point depends on the digestion being not too hot, not too cold. In Asian medicine, they have this idea of digestion being too hot, too cold. I certainly know. Yeah. Samadhi is a lot dependent on things like digestion, all kinds of things. Energy levels, all kinds of factors. One really sees if one is, it's almost difficult not to recognize, let's say after 20 experiences, that it's dependent on conditions. It's not something the self can get grandiose and sort of pumped up about. Again, what's actually much more common is a negative self view in relation to not reaching a jhana or I'm not far enough along yet. I can't. I'm a failure. I bet everyone else is better. I'm going too slowly. Then what can happen is a person thinks, I want to attain this deeper jhana or I want to attain the jhanas or whatever it is, this jhana, that jhana beyond where I am. Actually the intention is one of achievement for decorating the self view and propping up the self view or addressing a kind of more negative, that's a better way of saying, of wanting to address a negative self view. If I could just get that, then I'd feel better about myself. Get a badge, whatever. Sometimes that intention is not fully conscious. We actually don't quite realize what's in the mix of our intention when it comes to this. What's actually operating is a kind of avoidance of an intention to avoid a negative self view. That can be quite subtle and operating subtly. Even there, the attachment is the opposite of what we tend to think. We tend to think, oh, attached to the self view and the grandiosity, it looks like this. Actually, no, it's happening in a reverse way and sometimes much more subtly. Why? Why let the jhana give you the deepest things it can give you and the deepest things are the beauty of that happiness and the way it touches the being and the way it bathes the whole body and the whole chitta. That's a much deeper, more far reaching, more long lasting, more impacting gift than it gives me, I have achieved. I can say to myself, I have achieved X or Y, or tell other people I have achieved X or Y, or when there's a conversation, several people have achieved X or Y, I can also say, yes, I have to, or feel to myself that I have to let the jhanas give you the deepest gifts that they want to give you, that they can give you. That also goes back to what's significant. What are we emphasizing? When we're talking about the happiness. Perhaps for me, the most interesting kind of question of attachment that might arise from jhana is attachment to view. For example, someone opening, let's say, opening up to the sixth jhana and this sort of infinite consciousness and the experience there, and it gets really brief when the Buddha talks about that, but the experience of an infinite consciousness and it's there and it pervades the cosmos or it's a realm, almost like a transcendent realm, it's more accurate, but it can be felt both ways, we'll talk about it. It's possible then that someone opening to that experience is, huh, this is ultimately true or this is what they're talking about, this is the cosmic consciousness, this is whatever, and decides that it's ultimately true and gets attached to that as a view. To be attached to a view means to really believe this view is true, this perception is true. Or the fifth jhana or the seventh jhana or whatever. In here there's something opposite because I would say attachment to that kind of view, let's say this cosmic consciousness, this infinite awareness, this vast awareness being the ultimate reality, the eternal backdrop of all things, the source of all things, etc., the nature of everything, it is emptiness, it is etc., etc. That kind of view, it's much more likely to get in, someone's much more likely to get stuck in that view and believe it's the end and the ultimate truth when one hasn't done jhana's five, six, seven, eight. It's the opposite. It's exactly A having the map of, for example, something that goes beyond this quasi sixth jhana state of infinite consciousness. Once you get to the seventh jhana or the eighth jhana, you see, oh, that's a fabricated state, it's only a stage. It's actually the jhana's that help us wean off of you to this or that as the ultimate truth. It's, again, the concern, rather the jhana's are rather a remedy for certain attachments rather than a concern, I would say. That kind of view of a vast awareness being ultimately real, cosmic consciousness, awareness being the nature of things, that awareness being eternal and etc., unruffled, that being the nature of awareness, all that. That's much more likely to arise from sort of standard insight meditation practice with a lot of practice. It's a very common experience. It's also very common in other spiritual traditions. It's actually really, really common. But if we can go beyond that kind of experience and we have the map and it places it, we begin, hopefully, to experience something beyond it. We can't be ultimate. I've gone beyond it. And we begin to understand its context. What is that exactly? How did that experience this vast eternal seeming awareness, cosmic consciousness, whatever it is, how did it arise? How did it dependently arise as a perception? We understand its context. So this understanding it dependently arising, dependently ceasing, it's more than saying we see that it's impermanent as a view because a person can go in and out of the vastness of awareness or the cosmic consciousness or whatever many times and think, yeah, my experience of it is impermanent, but it's not impermanent. That's really common. It's eternal. It's just there and unchanging and radiant forever and serene and untouched forever and it embraces everything and it permeates everything. It's different variations. So yeah, I realize my experience of it is impermanent. I can either accept that my experience of it is impermanent and we'll go in and out, or I can just work towards making it more and more, more and more of the time I'm hanging out there. But that's not what I mean by understanding its dependent arising and dependent cessation. What I mean by understanding its dependent arising and dependent cessation is how does this perception arise and how does it cease? Not that it arises and ceases, but how? It's dependent on a certain amount of unfabricating and if I unfabricate more, it goes beyond it. It's a different thing than just, yeah, it's impermanent or my experience of it is impermanent. So hopefully if we have the right context for what we're doing in the whole of the Dharma, what we're doing in the whole of Jhana practice fits into that, this kind of attachment doesn't arise or we can get beyond it, put it that way. The more common danger here is attachment to what the Buddha would call wrong view or a misunderstanding or a limited and limiting view of emptiness, of the nature of awareness. If I think that's the ultimate nature of awareness, it's not ultimate. It's a perception, it's a relative perception. It's incredibly useful, incredibly healing and valuable and liberating to a certain extent. Is it ultimate? No. How am I going to find out that it's not ultimate? Limited or misunderstanding or wrong view about what Nibbana is and all this stuff. So the shoe is rather on the other foot, I think, in terms of attachment and Jhana. They're actually very powerful in terms of weaning us off. What can be really difficult kinds of attachment to sense pleasures and in this case to certain spiritual views. This one, that kind of thing that I've just described, I said I couldn't really think of anyone who got attached to pleasure, anyone that I'd encountered as a teacher or heard talk to over however many years of teaching, meeting a lot of people. I couldn't think of anyone. In the first six months of teaching, how many people I encountered who it seemed to me were actually pretty entrenched in some version of that vast awareness and that's ultimate, etc. I lost count easily in the first six months. It's so common and it can get very, very entrenched. So there's people who are there in that kind of view for really decades and they'll never get out of it. Sometimes the language that goes with it is very free and easy. It's very like, well, there's awareness that ultimately they don't have to do anything. It's just there. It happens whether I'm aware or not, it's there and everything's kind of equal within that. So it can sound very easy and the person seems unattached and it's all very free and maybe even goes with the viewer. There's no need to meditate because this is just there all the time. Actually all that is hiding a really quite entrenched view that's very, very difficult to budge. But one of the ways of going beyond it is actually with the Jhana's and with the Jhana map and actually just putting things in their context and understanding their dependent arising and dependent fading and understanding the whole process and then having this context and a whole different relation with all these beautiful and actually really valuable mystical openings and their relationship with truth and therefore with liberation. Okay, so I think that's all I wanted to say today. Someone left me. Nicole was this a note for now or just? No? Okay, so I'll look at it later. Yeah, okay. So should we take a couple of questions or should we just leave it enough for now? Let's just sit quietly. I think that's enough. Yeah. Got it? Yeah.... Time for tea..

 Okay, so time again if there are any questions that feel relevant to your practice or to anything that's been said about the framework or anything about the detail that we've covered at all. I have maybe just a few things I'd like to throw in as well, but why don't we start with some questions. Is that Lawrence? No, it's Andy. Andy, yes. Yeah, why don't we do it with the mic then it's easier. Thanks. Yeah, this was a question, Rob, about the difference or the similarity and the contrast between kind of tuning in to the nimitta or the qualities of the jhana, which feels kind of to me at least quite probie and it's almost like, what do they call it, keyhole surgery. It's almost like getting in into the quality amid all the other stuff around it. And then, yeah, but also finding the need for something more expansive. So I've been trying to play with it, almost conceiving it as listening to those qualities. So rather than it kind of probing in, kind of listening and tuning, I think you said something about trying to hear a noise, faint noise in the, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in lots of other noise. Yeah, because it feels like I need to open more and yet the very active kind of fine tuning feels the opposite of that. Yeah, thank you. So are you talking in particular about this space of peacefulness that opened for you? No, but with the first genre as well. Ah, okay. I see probably more with the peacefulness. More with the peacefulness? More with, more what I'm saying now relates to the peacefulness. Yeah, so it does. Yeah. Okay, good. Is my sound okay? Can you hear it at the back? Yeah. Yeah. Correct. It, it, it's both, you know, so I don't, sometimes there's a, sometimes the probing is a concentration thing, literally like how much attention can there be in a small amount of area. But then there's also the probing with the sense of can I really get the sense of this, you know, and then with the opening, there's also, as you say, it's, I don't quite know what would be that thing I said about what would be the best analogy, that thing I said about listening for a sound. Well, there's lots of sounds and there's just some particular sound I'm listening to. Maybe that's, that's a quality. You're actually not scrunching anything up. You're sort of opening more. It's like your antennae just becoming more sensitive within that openness. So yeah, those, those two modes will be important and you can play between them. What happens sometimes in the, with the peacefulness is, where the, how to put like, sometimes what happens is there's, there's a, I'll get into this when we talk more about the peacefulness. Sometimes what happens is there's a very, a very large peacefulness actually. And it's even larger than that, than the, you know, the energy body size. And depending on where you are, we want to spend more or less time in that. But at the beginning of the peacefulness, it's probably more energy body size, but you can still open up the attention wide. And it's really like almost like, imagine it's a kind of realm. It's a large realm where you're, we're almost listening to the music of the realm. So it's very subtle, exquisite, quiet music there. This is a metaphor. Yeah. And that's more open and the whole thing can feel more open. Other times you can just as the first journey, you pick a place where it seems strongest and you kind of burrow into it, probe into it. Yeah. But sometimes what else can happen is, and it might be after you've just lost it for a bit, or it might be as you're getting into it more, there's almost like, there can be almost like, how would we describe this? It's almost like, what would the word be? Like a filament of something, a filament of that piece. So spatially it's relatively, you don't know where you're going to find it in the energy body space, but it might, it can tend to be more lower down in the body, but it's a kind of, it's as if a filament sort of, trying to think of some kind of organism, sort of sort of simple organism that has these filament like things that would be... Anemone. Anemone? Do they have them? Yeah. That sort of thing. So, but it's, it's physical. Okay. So the other thing to add here, and we'll get to it more when we talk about the third genre more, is sometimes you're talking about a point in space that you're probing more, sometimes you're more open, sometimes you're more tuning into the mental quality of peacefulness, and sometimes you're more tuning into the physical quality of peacefulness. Ideally, we want those two to blend. But what it means at any time in your responsive play and working, it's like, what do I pick up here? And if in doubt, pick up the physical one first. And so that might be, feel like it's just a filament. It's not even located, it might be located, oh, it's located in my, I don't know, my belly button or my kidney or whatever it is, but more likely it's just a sort of place in space, a region in space. And there's this kind of filament of that exquisite peacefulness. And that's what you're going with. So there's that as well. Does that make sense? Yeah. Yeah. Then one more thing I want to add before, if it's okay. The other aspect here is, yeah, the other metaphor is really tuning the receiver. So if we think about tuning a radio receiver, we're thinking about the wavelength changing. There's lower wavelengths, lower frequencies, higher frequencies on the, on the, and really what you're doing in each genre is really tuning to a particular frequency as much as you're probing a certain point in space. So probing a certain point in space is very helpful, but that's not really what you're doing. You're really tuning to a certain frequency. If probing a certain point in space or opening up wide space or filament or whatever helps you lock in and get a sense of that frequency that's particular to that genre or that bandwidth of frequencies, then that's all good. But in a way, the primary thing you're doing is focusing on a certain frequency. When you said the genres themselves are more and more refined. So one of the things I forgot to ask you when I just asked you a few questions yesterday is, is this state of peacefulness more refined, more, let's use the word refined than let's say the second and the first genres. That's the question now. Oh, yes. Yeah, definitely. Yeah. Okay. Because that's also a signal. If you say, well, not sure, then I wouldn't be so sure that you've moved into a deeper state. There might be peaceful, might be very nice, but one of the real markers, apart from the other questions I asked you and maybe some others I can't think of right now, is the shift in refinement. And as you shift in refinement, then you have to get skilled at kind of tuning your receiver and holding there. And how that happens might be through the probing, might be through the open and with the antennae up, might be through the sense of filament, et cetera. But you can play with all of that. Is this? Yeah, no, that's really helpful. Address it, yeah. Just one more thing about because when the, I think the tuning is so helpful, it's like it's completely shifted my thinking about this whole practice actually, just like this tuning of the dial. But it seems like, you know, when there's tuning, there's not, or at least I'm finding it difficult then to also incorporate the enjoyment. I have to sort of, I'm tuning and then I'm like, oh no, wait, actually remember to enjoy it as well. Any recommendations about how to kind of make sure the enjoyment is there with the tuning? Well, if we turn it around and say maximize the enjoyment, and that's the most important thing, the E on the end of SASSI, then you will inevitably find that getting your tuning right is part of maximizing the enjoyment. So it might be just reversing the intentionality. I do think, with so many people, obviously think of Jhana and Samadhi as, I'm focusing on one point and it's a spatial point. And even if they don't think that consciously, that's what it becomes. But that's a very limited and limiting, actually is a limiting way of understanding what's happening. So I would rather go with this frequency thing. But in terms of intention, you can reverse that. Does that make sense? I'm here with this thing. It's like I'm listening to a radio program and I really want to enjoy, what is that music or whatever it is, I love it. Then I'm going to want to play with that dial just because I love it. I'm just following my enjoyment. You understand? It's just part of like, well, I can play with the volume, I can shut my door so I can't hear my siblings arguing or whatever it is, but children, whatever. But that's going to be just organically part of me just being into it. Do you see what I mean? Yeah, thank you. So it might be part of it as just a kind of subtle reordering the hierarchy of intention at any point. Like I said, sometimes I feel that all you need to do is trust this kind of wish to enjoy things to the max and really let that kind of lead sometimes. But let's see if there's anything else. It might be related to something I said earlier. You know, the sense of that or the sense of tuning to the refinement might be helped at different times by tuning in more to the physical and inverted commas, the energy body frequency of that refinement and sometimes more to the mental. That that shift might also help incorporate, literally incorporate the enjoyment more. Does that make sense? Yeah. Yeah. Okay, good. Julia, yeah. I have a question about using insight ways of looking at genre practice. So I've been using them as a base practice and noticing that there's some anxiety about how indiscriminately or discriminately I'm using them, like remembering that part of the instruction with them in emptiness practice is to use them for everything, like whether something is pleasant, unpleasant, neutral. But then some worry about using them to look at wellbeing, for example, like that that will prevent PT from fabricating. So like, I guess part of what I've been playing with is just sort of using them indiscriminately for a little while. And then once a sense of wellbeing starts to open up, using them more discriminately, like I found using on a talk and help relax some help me to open some, relax some of the yak clinging or around the wellbeing that's coming. But if you have anything on that. Yeah, thank you. Is it okay? It's not okay. How's that? Yeah. Okay, thanks. Yeah, really important question. Thank you. So it's a bit like, what's it a bit like? It's a bit like, again, I'm sure there's better analogy than this, but it's a bit like going down a water slide, you know, one of those theme park things. But imagine this water slide at certain points all the way down, it has turnings off it. So it goes, but every once in a while it has a turning off to the left, a turning off to the right. And you can just kind of, have you been on one of those yet? You can just kind of veer to if you want to the right, hopefully without slamming. It's not a great analogy, but you get the idea. It's got padded sides. Okay. So, so what that means is, yeah, if you use it indiscriminately at first, it's everything that comes up, you said, let's say for taking that as an example, whatever comes up, once some wellbeing comes up, then if you keep, like let's say, if I just started with, I think I gave an example, or if I just, I'll go back, back pain. So I just did annata annata annata to everything, including the back pain. What would eventually happen was the pain would attenuate, the body sense would start to dissolve and at some point pleasure of some kind would come up. Let's say it was PT. So at that point I've got, okay, I'm sliding down this thing, it's great, and I've got a right turn there that I can lean into, which means once the PT has built enough, I can then stop doing insight practice and just subtly, or gently, let's put it gently, but completely switch what I'm doing to, now I just want to enjoy, enjoy that particular thing which is the PT. If the PT comes up, okay, back pain's gone to neutral and then PTs come up and then the body's dissolving, and then I say, okay, PT, and I keep doing annata on PT, it will go beyond it. Have you found that already? Is that what's happening? Or you're worried that it might happen? Yeah, that's what I'm worried about. You're worried about, yeah. And so I find that I'm not even using it to look at the PT to begin, like as soon as something in the realm of pleasurable comes up, I just stop and then sort of things shut down a little bit. Yeah, okay, so you need to find a kind of middle ground between being, you know, as the Buddha says, don't snatch at it, okay, so that's really important. But you can also kind of relax, it's like don't worry, you know, you might overshoot and then you can come back. It might be, this is something I wanted to say to everyone, it might be that you overshoot and you find yourself most commonly in, I don't know, you know, some other jhana. And then either you can work backwards from there, and we can talk about how do you work backwards, or you can hang out there a while, get really used to that and then work backwards, or that can become your primary playground. So in a way, don't worry. You know, I think the important thing first is to feel like you can do this and get a sense of well-being, which at some point you can kind of, you know, steer your body into this thing and then just enjoy and you make that shift. Exactly where it comes out, I think first things first, don't worry about it. First get that confidence. That's really important. And then we can map it and then we can see, okay, well maybe that becomes, just for example, let's say it ends up being the fourth jhana or whatever, okay, well let's learn the fourth jhana before we learn the first, okay. This is what I said about people who've done different practices. It's actually, and I realize now we have a room full of people here who have a lot of practice experience, especially insight experience. So things won't necessarily evolve for everyone in the order one, two, three, four. It may or it may not. But once the PT has arisen, you know, don't snatch at it. You may also, the PT has arisen and I'm doing my anatone something else and the PT is arising. So that's another option. I wouldn't do it so much on the PT itself, you know. Like I think I mentioned, if you just stay with those insight, they'll take you all the way into the formless realms and that will probably be just a bit disorienting for right now, you know. But how does that sound? I'm not giving exact instructions, but I think the most important thing is don't worry too much about it. That's what I wanted to hear. Yeah, that's really important. Okay. Anything more with it? No, that's good. Okay, great. Someone else back there. Mikhail, yeah, please. Thank you. I would like to ask about subtle hindrances. And, yeah, hindrances that seem to be somehow coupled with increasing subtlety. I was practicing the second jhana and doing the same thing as I was doing yesterday, what I mentioned about really absorbing into it and trying to keep up with the subtlety of attention when the suka gets really subtle. And what I've been noticing again and again after a certain point, when it gets really subtle and especially when it starts to sort of lean more towards peacefulness and the third jhana, I noticed that my attention somehow, there arises a bit of like micro level sloth and torpor. So, the micro level tiredness and when it gets really subtle and towards the peacefulness, it more or less, I just get tired somehow and lose my focus and it just falls apart. And then I have to reverse come back. I might get some energy from increasing the suka or increasing the pity. And then again, I would go come to the level of very subtle attention, subtle nimitta and then it sort of like falls into tiredness. So how could one work with this? I'm wondering as I'm listening, Mikhail, if I'm wondering, I don't know if this is correct, but if you could think about two things, one is maximizing the enjoyment as opposed to maximizing the concentration or even worrying about the subtlety, although we talked about that yesterday. So and what that, the other thing I'm mixed with that is, is it possible to keep it longer at a less, at a more bubbly level of happiness, which technically is just happiness with more pity mixed in it. And let it stay there for much longer with the intention and attitude to really enjoy it more as opposed to now I'm refining my concentration, now I'm going deeper in the absorption, etc. They're all important factors, but it might be that what's happening and again, because of your background and sort of practice or jitta habits from practice, it might be that it's just going the absorption and the concentration of deepening faster than the enjoyment is deepening. Yeah, and the sort of, you know, I find the Buddha's images so accurate in so many ways, his similes, it's like really drink that water from the spring, really, really delight in it, you know, and just because that's doing something as well. It's giving you energy, but it's also doing something. So we'll do something to the way it then moves deeper, if you like. So we can, it can go deeper through this increasing subtlety, but as you said, sometimes it gets too subtle and we're not able to follow it, and sometimes it's not quite the right thing that needs to happen. I'm going to talk about the second genre tomorrow, but this is actually quite key. So is it, what's the most, if you ask me, what's the most significant aspect of the second genre, you know, a lot of, one might be tempted to say, well, that's where thought stops, the Buddha says, that's where thought stops. So that's a very significant kind of threshold in terms of deepening concentration. I'm going to come back to that, I say, well, it's not as simple as we might think what that means. It is important, but I would say in the grand scheme of things, what's much more important is the happiness. Bathing in the happiness is doing something to the being. Knowing these different bandwidths of happiness is doing something to the being marinating over and over again in that happens, drinking your fill of happiness is in the long term, in terms of its relation to insight, in terms of its work that it's doing, in terms of your capacity to let go, in terms of how it's opening the heart, in terms of what it's teaching you eventually about perception and malleability, perception, emptiness, dependent arising, that's the key thing. So yes, what's the work that needs to happen in this moment? That's a sort of very subtle question that's going on for any meditator in not every moment, but a lot of moments. One can say, oh, I really need to focus more, I really need to let it subtleize, drop down with the subtlety and corresponding subtlety of mind, I want to be absorbed more. These are all valid choices at any time, but it might be that just delighting in the happiness is actually much more significant. As I said, it will probably deliver you to a slightly different place or a very different place, even in terms of the third genre when we get to it, it's not in a way you can divide the third genre into three and all those levels are important, but going with the happiness more and really, really enjoying it might help steer you a little bit better. Does this make sense? Yes, indeed. Yes, and so the second thing is, so to do that, it sounds like you already know, but just to add, so I want to keep the happiness relatively gross, okay? So it's a little bit the opposite of the instructions I gave you yesterday, and you can play between the two, sometimes just keep the happiness more gross. How do we do that? It's part of this tuning. It's part of just an intention to keep, I want to keep it in this ballpark, in this bandwidth, yes? But it's also, sometimes what you can do, it sounds like you already are doing it, is just mix a bit more PT in if it gets too subtle, if it gets too, or rather if it gets too calm. If the happiness starts to get too serene, you just mix a bit more PT in with it, yes? Eventually all these different bandwidths of different genres become just accessible without having to do any tricks, you just kind of remember back to this and that level within it. But how does that sound? Yes, it sounds very good, and you have been describing some of my experiences already, and I just wanted to add that I just realized that many times my second genre works better when I'm doing it in walking meditation. So it keeps on a grosser level, just because of the movement of the body. Right, coordination. So that's great, and eventually what we want is that it's not so influenced by posture, walking, sitting, standing, but by intention and this kind of steering. It's all part of the responsiveness and creativity that we're talking about, and you can do it by just a little bit more PT in there, gin and tonic. Yeah? Thank you. Okay, good. I just need to take this off. I have a couple of questions, maybe I'll start with the first. I've been working on the first genre for a few days, and then it felt like I reached your mastery definition, and I moved on. But I kind of wonder whether it might have been too fast, because it feels like the access to all these different aspects of mastery is very dependent on the fact that I do it all the time. And what I would really like to do is to be able to practice jhanas back home on a daily practice, just one hour a day or two, and with all the noise of daily life in the background. So I kind of wonder. Yeah, probably access to jhanas is dependent on a million conditions, a lot of different conditions, off retreat, on retreat, there'll be lots of different conditions which allow that each day, each sitting. But one of them is just how familiar it all is, how familiar that PT is. So a lot of those aspects of mastery are just dependent on being so repeatedly soaked in something that it's just easy to summon it and etc. So it might be longer. Yeah. And then how would you know, just like spend more time with what already feels like familiar and stable? It might be, but it still might be that you might have, because we talked about you having two or even three playgrounds. So that increasing familiarity, let's say with the first jhana might happen in parallel at the same time, I was on this retreat with the second and the third, and you're just developing more and more of them like that together. In other words, you're still getting familiarity with the first, but you're still developing familiarity with the second as well. Practicing the first when I'm focusing on the second? No, no, no. I mean, in the course of the day, you might move between the first and second, but give yourself a generous time in the first and a generous time in the second. Yeah, so I gave myself a generous time in the first and now I move to giving myself a generous time with the second. I wonder whether it should still be generous with the first. I don't know. I don't know. I mean, at a certain point, maybe I'll say tomorrow, what will happen is it becomes almost maybe a little difficult to stay in the first. And as Andy was saying, the mind so much wants to slide. It's almost got its own agenda and its own wisdom. So it's a tricky question, but there's no reason why you can't just continue for a while with three jhanas and move and doesn't have to be right the next three days I'll spend in one. The next three days after that is just like today, I'll do all three and tomorrow I'll do all three and the day after I'll do all three. As to what happens in your daily life, it's hard to predict because a lot depends on jhanas. I'd go back to the Buddha's description of the first jhana. It's dependent on seclusion, dependent on withdrawal, but not from people and things. It's dependent from withdrawal from entanglement, withdrawal, seclusion from the hindrances. So of course, sometimes we're in the life and in our daily life and we're just entangled in stuff, relational stuff, work stuff, this pressure, that pressure, and the mind is actually more entangled. And then it's harder to withdraw internally from those pressures. And then health things, all kinds of things affect what actually happens. It's actually hard to predict. I don't know really. My just intuitive hunch is why don't you let yourself just have three for now? And they're happening in parallel. So your day is moving between those three as best you can, maybe roughly equally doesn't have to be. This day is a bit more this one, that day is a bit more that one. And just trust in all of that, that it will bear fruit in different ways. It's probably the case that whatever you can sort of access regularly on a long retreat is further along than what you can access for most people in their daily life. But there's so much individual variation. So that's just my intuitive kind of hunch. I don't know. Does that sound okay? Okay. Can I ask one more thing? Sure. Yeah. So with the first Jhana, it was very different than the previous time I practiced the first Jhana in the ways you said that it was less intense and all that. But also it was like just less, less wonderful in a way and like the first time I practiced it like about a year ago, it was really deeply affecting the whole being and very impressive and kind of produced a lot of faith in the Dharma. And now it is if like there are some parts of the psyche that are just not interested in it anymore. And they just don't get involved. So it's not like the body is suffused with pity and it's not even, even the consciousness is like can be full of the Jhana, but like some parts of the. So I kind of wonder both, is it important and can I convince them to join again still? Or just say, okay, nevermind, now they're in the second and third Jhana and just it also, is it going to happen with each of them? Because. So it's, it's very normal. I think I mentioned this is very normal then to become much less interested in the first Jhana after you've tasted particularly the third is very, very normal. And you can go through a period like this. I think one thing is a larger view that actually I'm, I'm really wanting all eight Jhanas, you know, it does get more less intense over time. It becomes more mellow and that's partly by the opening to the third Jhana, etc. And the more peaceful realm. So that's all normal, you know. Again, if you think about more of a direction rather than a, I'm trying to achieve a certain amount of, of kind of this full involvement, you know, just think here I am now practicing the first Jhana and maybe it's a little less than I'm practicing the second and third Jhana. But when I go there, part of, part of my intention is can I find this really lovely? Can I actually really get into it? Rather than am I or am I not? It's like it's more of direction. Is it possible to get more, more without a sense of did I pass or fail that test of, yeah, it's a subtle difference. It's a direction. It doesn't make sense. I don't think it's about, it's not like do I pass or fail. It just, it feels that some areas are just off, kind of not interested in this. Yeah, but your task is to, just to give yourself to it more. Just to, just to open to it more. It may be that when you've had more to drink from the third Jhana, etc., that your, and maybe deeper Jhana is that your relationship with the first Jhana is then recontextualized and you see it in a much, as it, it's, it's, when it first comes, there's nothing else. There's just normal consciousness or Papansha and the first Jhana and it's, you know, it's completely the most amazing thing. And it's, it's just, it's a signal to the being that completely other states of consciousness are possible. So it's really going to, oftentimes really makes a dramatic effect, you know, a dramatic impression. As you go on more, it's, it's more like it just takes its place in a much larger jigsaw puzzle of, or mandala of the eight Jhanas, you know, and, but you still have a sense of this is really valuable. So part of your task is to, in that larger context, really, really kind of, can I, can I just really find the enjoyment here? And you're just trying to work in that direction, but it probably won't be as dramatic, et cetera, et cetera, as it was the first time. That's okay because it's, because it's just one part of a much bigger picture. Yeah, I think so. The same thing happened to the other Jhana, is it just the first because of the third? Well, in a way it does. I, I don't know. I'm not sure. I think in a way it might, but in a way it might be that there's something particular about our relationship with the first Jhana. But I don't, you'll have to find out. I think there's a way once you have a, once you've done more and you have a whole context that you really start to, it's almost like having that context puts them, puts them, it takes the pressure off, you know, having it to be a certain way. Does that make sense, what I'm saying about context? It's like you have a larger context and yeah, it just takes the pressure off. I also think, you know, if you spend more time, let's say in the third, then the quality of the rapture is, is yummy in a different way. And so you have to kind of find, oh, it's a different taste than I was originally used to. And then as, oh, that's actually really nice, you know, so that might be something. Yeah. Okay. Thanks. Ah, Joel, yeah. Yes. Sometimes samadhi is quite dry actually. And I recognize myself quite much when you're talking about people who's been quite much in traditional insight retreat and being quite used in, for me, it's a space of, it's quite spacious, a lot of equanimity usually, but quite dry actually. And no, no big deal. No big glaciers. The energy body is quite light and, but not really pleasant actually, more like neutral and, um, I tried different things like warming the whole thing up with matter and, um, pleasure, try to find pleasure, but sometimes there is no pleasure. It seems so at least. So any advice? Yeah. So this, this is really important. This is why I said it's actually, so the movement to equanimity will be, or the tendency to, to find oneself in a sort of equanimous space will be quite common for people who've done a lot of insight practice, et cetera. The question for our purposes here is whether that equanimity is close to a jhanic equanimity. And there are different kinds of jhanic equanimity, like ones, very big ones or smaller ones with the energy body, or whether it's just equanimity and it's not really close to a jhana. Now what you're describing actually doesn't sound like it's very, it's still a skillful state. It's, you know, much better than being papanshara or, you know, whatever, but it's not really close to, it's not really close to a jhana equanimity. So for some people actually what they're describing, they just work their way into it and actually become something like the fourth jhana, let's say, or whatever. But the sense I get from what you're describing is actually it's not that close. And so rather than trying to go in there first and come back and convert that to a sort of, you know, fourth jhana, it's actually from the beginning, try to think more about piti and sukha and what will ignite that. So are there ways that piti and happiness can, you know, what would bring up piti and happiness? If I asked you that, what would you say? In other words, not letting yourself go to that state, something else from the beginning that would. I mean, in the big picture, I'm going between the third and the second jhana quite easily throughout the day. It's not happening all the time, the dried samadhi thing. But it does. Okay. Yeah. Okay. So I can just come back to the first, I mean, I'm a bit snobby about the first jhana now, I have to say. And I go easily to the second one. Yeah. It's like, and I really love to explore the different subtleties of this jhana. So I really love that one. It became sort of my base. The second. Yeah, the second one. Good. Yeah, good. Okay. So it's only going to the saccanimity place that's not very jhanic sometimes. Yeah. Okay. When it goes there, bring it back. In other words, at the moment, it's not ripe enough, the others are not ripe enough to turn that into a jhanic state at the moment. You need more time in the happiness and the equanimity, as I said, is not quite, but a little related to Mikal's question, then they will deliver you to a different kind of equanimity that's much closer to a jhana. Yeah. So when it goes there, like I said, relatively speaking, it's a pretty skillful place to hang out. But in terms of, it doesn't really sound like it's got in it what will, at the moment, what will allow it to blossom into an actually jhanic equanimity of any kind really. So when it goes there, fine. Just see, oh, it's done that again. And do something to bring back, if you can summon it just by itself, the happiness or the peacefulness of the third. Great. Just go back. If you can't, then how am I going to get back? If I can remember it, if I can add a happy thought in, if I can just have a subtle intention, if I need to go back to the base practice or whatever. Yeah. But I wouldn't hang out in that, at the moment, I wouldn't hang out in that kind of equanimity too much. Yeah. So that's what you're liking, the second and third, and you just need more time there. It really works on the being gradually, and it prepares something to ripen in its time. So this space that you're in now is more a result of your other practice rather than the jhana practice. And does it make sense? Yes. Yeah. Okay. Great. So is that Lauren? Yes, please. So, I felt your suggestions yesterday were helpful, and I've today been able to work a little with PT. Well, a lot with PT. And two questions about it that feel like coming up today, but also coming up in the past when I worked with PT. And the first one is sort of related to some of these questions around enjoyment, and that so there'll be sometimes, especially if I'm working with the breath energy, there'll be a lot of pleasure, but if I let the breath go and I bring the attention to what are sensations of tingling, and sort of like an effervescence in the body, and compression, expansion, and sort of like the energy body feels harmonized, but there's not a lot of pleasure in it. So that's one question, and then the other one is that sometimes when that harmonized energy body, when there's a sensation of that sort of coalescing even more, or like the deepening of the samadhi, that there'll be actually pretty frequently sort of like an immediate, like my mind will immediately like pull back and be like, uh-uh, no, don't go in there. And so yeah, those are two questions. Sorry, I'm struggling a little bit today with the medication and things. So the first one, I just want to make sure I understand, the first one is you're working with the breath and the energy body, and PT arises, but when you switch to the PT, you find it's not really strong enough to work with. Is that correct? Well, the pleasure, yeah, so maybe there's like there's a lot of sensation in the body. There's a lot of like tingling, and that feels like throughout the whole body, but it's not necessarily pleasurable. It's just kind of odd. Okay, so here's an interesting thing. It might be that you need to spend more time working with the breath. You're working with breath and energy body, right? Yeah, that's your principle practice. Yes. It might be you just need more time with the breath and energy body to allow that tingling to become clearly pleasant. It might be. Or it might be that actually you turn your attention to the tingling and you find that what's, whether you perceive it as pleasant or unpleasant, I think I just threw this out very briefly the other day, is actually something you can play with. You can just decide to see it as pleasant. It may be that that's the case. So it's a bit like when we talked about excitement. It's a bit like sometimes that it's kind of on a fence and you can flop it either way. It's just odd or it's unpleasant or it's pleasant. And then you can learn to play with the perception that way. And then it's like, okay, that's what I'm doing again until it is established in a kind of flow of pleasantness. But I would try both, both the playing with perception, just decide to see it as pleasant and also let's just stay a little longer or maybe even a lot longer with the practice. Let the tingling build up and see if it transforms by itself. Okay. And the second one was. When the samadhi starts to deepen, then there's like the mind pulls back from. Pulls back from what though? The felt sensations of the deepening or the experience of the samadhi deepening. Okay. But I would, what might be interesting is to get a little more specific. Is it fear arising at that point? If so, what exactly? Yes. What exactly are you afraid of in that, at that moment? Because samadhi deepening involves a whole, whole bunch of different things happening, whole bunch of interwoven aspects. So what exactly is it that you're afraid of? Do you have a sense or? That's a good question. You might not know now. Yeah. So that would be something to take and find out, you know, there's all kinds of things that a meditator can get, can get a little, a little bit afraid of, you know, at that point and the pullback is maybe coming from fear, maybe. So that would be just an inquiry to take into practice. Really valuable potentially. Yeah. Find out what, what is it exactly? And then we can, then we can kind of target more specifically what we might need to, how we might need to work differently with that. Does that make sense? Yeah. That feels helpful. Why don't we just say that for now? So give it to you as an inquiry as something to begin to discern a little bit more clearly. Great. Thanks. Good. Good. Okay. I am. Hannah, does it feel like your question can wait till tomorrow or is it better to talk to us now? Do you feel it can wait? Okay. Let me just say a few things that have come up in interviews or whatever that might be useful to everyone. First thing, I didn't mention this in the opening talk, but I never said, and I never say on a retreat, don't make eye contact or that kind of thing. So some of you will be coming in from other retreats and other forms where that's what you're taught and you're just plugging that in. Like I said, I don't consider it a particularly helpful teaching to give or kind of guidance to give for retreat generally. So you can make eye contact with each other and with coordinators and with whoever else if you want to, when you want to. Again, can you be responsive to what you need at any moment? Because actually the connection with each other is part of the appreciation. It's part of the medita. It's part of the rich soil of what allows samadhi to deepen. It may not be that shuffling around slowly staring at your feet and being kind of insular like that. It may not open up much samadhi because something might get dry in the heart and feel not connected. But you have to see at any moment what you need because there might be moments where actually you do need to be a bit more inside. Something's going on in your experience or whatever and you need to kind of, I'm not into that right now. You're not obliged to make eye contact. Like I said, it gets very complicated psychologically or it can on retreat. What's involved in eye contact or what it triggers or what it means or all this. What are my psychological patterns of sort of avoiding contact or needing it or seeking it? So we could probably talk for hours on this. I'm certainly not going to but it's quite complex psychologically. But we should say one thing, just what do I need right now? And I might need to be a bit more within and a bit more focused for whatever reason. Maybe it's an emotional thing. Maybe I'm just working with a certain energy at that point or whatever. But correspondingly, if you make eye contact or smile at someone and they might be at a moment or at a time when they need to be more insular. And so you might come at them with eye contact and a smile without realizing it that you're hoping for a smile back and they just completely blank you. And if you're not careful, that can be kind of start to take that personally and I start to think, oh, they don't like me for some reason or whatever it is. And the mind just spins with that. So if we're going to let ourselves at times make eye contact and be open, you have to be also kind of quite spacious about am I putting pressure on this situation or expecting or demanding something. And really respect other people's space and their rhythms and what they need. So in response to Karen's question, we're talking about when the Buddha says, you know, he hardly ever says, I said this before, but I'll say it again, he hardly ever says, dependent on really focusing very hard and very steadily on the tip of the nose. The first Jhana arises. He hardly ever says that. He says basically the standard formula is dependent or not the word, it's dependent on withdrawal or dependent on seclusion from the hindrances, from entanglement. The practitioner opens and enters into the first Jhana. So it's not that we want to close sense contact. I mean, that's one way of doing it, but you might be drying something else up inside. And I said how much the Samadhi practice depends on open heartedness and openness of being. So this is something that can be quite subtle as usual, quite some responsiveness. It's dependent on open heartedness, but not getting entangled rather than just shutting everything down. So that's part, again, to me, part of the art and part of the beauty of being on retreat is really sensing deeper levels of connection that we can have with each other, the sense of communion in silence without talking to each other or having someone listen to my story or whatever it is. You just get the sense of each person's being and the particularities and the uniqueness of each person's being, and it's just in the vibe. And one's open to that and one's sort of cherishing in a way sensitive to each person's particularities and enjoying that. So sometimes we're a bit more like this and sometimes we're a bit more like this, but being open and feeling connected is actually quite important, I think, and it's part of the art. Doesn't make sense? Some of you have probably never been on retreat where anyone said to not make eye contact, but for a lot of people in the Theravdha Dharma world, that's very, very common. So hopefully that makes sense. So if I'm going to be open, etc., again, we go back to related to this in a certain way is I really need to keep my intention steady. My intention is Jhna practice, and that's why we're here. That's what this retreat was set up for. So that I can be open, etc., but my intention is steady. That very steadiness of intention is what allows you to be open. Again, there's a difference between being open and getting entangled and then getting lost and my intention has gone somewhere else versus I can be open partly because I'm just really clear about what my intention is. So the intention is really for Jhna practice, primarily. And then secondly, this intention like what is my playground? So this should hopefully get, if it's not clear for you already, it should be getting very, very clear soon. Now some of you, like I said, when we responded to Karen, and I've said in interviews, some of you are going to have multiple playgrounds at once. So it's not necessarily the second Jhna, it's the first. It might be. Some of you might be working on two or three at once and partly because of how they interact with each other or what that enables. In other words, for example, like the third Jhna might mellow out the first Jhna. The first Jhna is just too intense and so the second Jhna helps it a little bit. So yeah, it should be getting clear. And if you feel it's really not clear where your learning edge playground is, really let's try and get everyone clear with the three of us, with Sarai and Robert, really what your playground is, really in the next day or two max. So this is my learning edge playground. And as I said, for some of you, because of your past experience, it will be a kind of multiple playground. That's completely fine. So this is different than teaching a retreat where people are just starting from the beginning in meditation. Do I need to talk... does anyone who's quite familiar with imaginal practice, is anyone getting confused about what the difference is between imaginal spaces and jhnak spaces and things or is that okay? So I don't really need to talk about that. Okay, good. And then here's a funny thing. And again, everyone brings their own unique psychology, etc., to this. So sometimes we're too easily satisfied as human beings. A lot of people, what you're running into is too much pushiness. So either I want this to be better, which we've talked about, or what's next, what's next, what's next, what's the next jhana, what's next, I'm ready for the next one. But sometimes we're a little bit too easily satisfied with something that we can already do. It's nice and so it's like, okay, well, I'll just stay here. So it's so individual and it can change at different times, but this is part of the art of the whole thing. It's also like... and to check out with a teacher, you know, what's my... I learn a lot about my life psychology here, but you see it in the microcosm of something like jhana practice. Jhana practice reveals a lot because it's inherently kind of goal-oriented. And so we learn so much about our relationship with goals and all that. So some of you, or some of you in some moments will be being too pushy and probably everyone has encountered that. But some of you will be a little too easily satisfied with where you are, or where you've been for a while. So again, that's something you might want to bring to interviews and explore a little bit. The interviews, yeah, so they're quite regular, aren't they? They're every other day for people and really, you know, if they're... I don't know if you've been feeling this, but there's no pressure on the interviews. So don't feel like you have to come in and say something super insightful or interesting or have a big problem or a really great question. I mean, hopefully you will have all of those things, but you don't have to. And sometimes what happens in the course of a long retreat with jhanas is the practice itself is just kind of plateauing for a while. It's like something's gestating and then at a certain point it'll just take a quantum leap. So if that's the case at any point, well, I'm going into this interview saying pretty much the same thing I said in the last interview, or reporting the same thing. No problem, just report it. Maybe the interview's a lot shorter, you know, and just checking how you're doing. Maybe one of the... You know, the teacher will ask you a couple of things or find something that can work with, but maybe it's just shorter. So don't... I don't know if it is arising, but if you feel any sense of pressure for the interviews, you don't have to. Something I've said before, but I think it really bears repeating maybe in a slightly different words. So PT, if we're talking about PT, we'll have a huge range of how strong it is, how intense it feels. In a way it really doesn't matter. It's got to be strong enough to work with, strong enough to get into, but sometimes it can feel relatively weak, and especially like I said, maybe that's compared to the first few times I experienced it or whatever. In a way what we want is to be okay with that whole range, you know, okay when it's really very intense. Can I bear that? Can I open to it? Can I actually find that enjoyable? Can I really come into a relationship with it where that's fruitful rather than kind of almost like cringing in relationship to it or holding back or contracting, which would be very normal for most people. But also on the other side when it's kind of relatively weak, can I... It's like it's fine. It's okay. It's definitely pleasant, but it's definitely nothing to write home about. Can I still get into that? Can I learn how to work with that relatively unremarkable PT and still really get into it and give myself wholeheartedly and see what's possible there? It may not become more intense. I mean it may become more intense, but as we said with the sassy, the eye is not so important. What's important though is here is this, in this sitting or this walking, whatever it is, is this PT that's not so intense, it's still PT. Can I stay interested in it? Can I work with it? Maybe what has to happen is I have to actually increase the intensity of my attention, not the intensity of the PT, but the intensity of my attention. And again, it's like, do I know how to do that? Do I actually get a sense of what it feels like to have a very intense attention and a less intense attention and a kind of medium attention? Do I recognize what that feels like? Can I turn the dial on that or the fader switch? Can I have an intense attention without getting a headache? Or is it with this slightly weaker PT that I actually need to go into the opening more and that's what needs to happen? So can I open intensely? We tend to think of intensity as a kind of probing. What would it be to really, really intensely, that's why I use words like surrender and abandon oneself. So it might be that that needs to get more intense. It's not the PT necessarily that needs to get more intense, but I need to find the whole kind of, of all the aspects of attention, all the different dials there, all the different faders there, what's the maximal setting for each one? That's a way too technical analogy, but I'm playing with all these different aspects of attention, playing with all the possibilities there to really make this work even though the PT itself is not very remarkable. So that in itself is a really useful skill. It's a real, as part of the art. I just want to throw out two things which I hardly mentioned and just in case people who haven't encountered them before are encountering them and are a little, you know, phased by them. One is, I think I mentioned it, did I mention the nada sound? I just mentioned it, but I didn't really. So it's pretty common for some people in meditation or common at certain stretches of their meditation life when the samadhi deepens in some degree, might be even not jharnic, to hear a kind of ringing in the ears, a kind of buzzing or that sort of thing. It's very normal. Some people take that as a meditation object and there's a couple of different ways you can work with it as a meditation object. You can work with it as a concentration object. You can work with it in a way that is a kind of help, a platform in insight. But really what I wanted to just say right now is just that it's normal and nothing weird is going on. You hear a ringing in your ears that sounds like it's really loud even sometimes. You don't have to take it as an object and if you're fine with whatever practice you're doing, leave it. Just let it be there. It's just something that's going on. It might come and go. It's not a big deal. It doesn't mean there's something wrong with your brain or anything like that at all. The second thing that can happen, it happens a lot with insight meditation and certainly if you're doing these actual insight ways of looking that Julia mentioned and I mentioned the other day. But what will also happen with Samadhi practice is that sometimes after a practice and you look around you or you're walking around and it's almost like everything feels like you're looking at a wall and it just feels like it's made of paper or it's see-through or it's lost its solidity. Very, very normal. Not a problem at all. You're not going crazy. It's completely normal. What's going on there is actually really interesting and is something I'll come back to when we really start to talk about insight and jhana more. But just I'm saying both these things about the sound and the kind of visual perception of sort of loss of solidity or that sort of thing just to reassure in case these things are opening up and you're not used to them. I think that's it. Yeah, I think that's it. So we have, I don't really know what to do about this note that I just got. I'm not sure if we should try and all decide but it might be something we should somehow all try and decide together. So this may not be wise to try and do it this way. We're all adults. The maintenance department have asked that we flag up to you the potential of setting off the fire alarm if there is much smoke from the hanukkah candles in the dining room and to check that they are definitely not left unattended. So I mean for me if I just say what I think and then you can tell me what you think, I don't think it's a problem if a fire alarm goes off. It's fine. They know how to deal with it and they'll deal with it. It's probably pretty unlikely. So that's my inclination with the first bit. The second bit about unattended, I don't know how long do they burn for do you think? Oh, is that it? An hour and a half. So, you know, you can kind of get a sense if some of you are sitting there in silence with them and practicing you can just if you're the only one there then sorry you have to stay if there's a few of you then maybe you can just communicate or I'm going to go now and then because well do you want to come back in 15 minutes and do a rotor or something? Yeah, how does that sound? Anyone got any better ideas with that? I'm glad it's only an hour and a half, not all night. Does that sound okay? So it doesn't have to be a big deal at all. Okay, great. So let's have a bit of quiet to end before today. Thank you..................

 So I think today we'll just have some questions and responses rather than, as I said, rather than give you more material. You've got enough to work with and work on for a while. I don't want to overwhelm you more. So maybe just a couple of things before we open it up, which is the general thing to say. Remember what I said about the hindrances, right? They're going to come, in case you hadn't noticed. They're going to come and go, the whole thing is like this. The whole thing is like this. What do we want in relation to the hindrances? We want to be working on them, antidotes, what can I try? The same creativity, the same responsiveness, the same awareness and sensitivity, working on them when they come. But we also want, in terms of the wisdom, we want not to take them personally. It doesn't mean my practice has now forever fallen through the floor into the hell realms and I'll be stuck here forever. It doesn't mean I can't do this. It doesn't mean that you're a failure. It doesn't mean any of that. Really, really important. Because when the hindrances are around, they're like little poisons and they poison the mind and the mind starts believing all kinds of things, particularly about the self, about one's practice, etc. So we really need to kind of keep the views screwed on right with them. Really, really important. We recognize that this is a hindrance. It's a hindrance. Self-doubt is a hindrance. I can't do this. It's doubt. It's a hindrance. When they come, they make us prone to believing all kinds of things, all kinds of things about someone else, about Guy House, about ourselves, about the retreat, about life, whatever. They really are like a poison dart. Then it spreads in the bloodstream and everything gets caught up and toxified through that and the whole way we look at things. Not to take them personally and not to believe the stories they spin. Hindrance in itself is more a kind of very base level. It's not at a complex level of the mind. It's a very basic level of the mind. When we're not careful, the complex story-making, world-building levels of the mind get infected by the hindrances. That's Papansha. Then we go bonkers. Over time, over time, the Papansha bit, we learn to wean that off, to refine it off the hindrances. The hindrance just becomes more and more like just a bit antsy or whatever it is. It's the basic energy of it without it proliferating, which is what Papansha means, proliferating to these other levels. They will come and go. On the scale of things, how you feel right now, and some of you will be flying and some of you will be really not flying and feeling this way. It's just part of the up and if you're up, guess what? If you're down, guess what? If you're in the middle, guess what? It takes a while to get used to this, but if you were to do a really long genre, it's so obvious. It becomes so obvious that our whole relationship to it becomes we have a different perspective, much more spacious perspective. Yes, of course we prefer the hindrances to not be there. Of course, but the whole added sense of, oh, this is terrible, I'm terrible, all that stuff, it just goes more and more. That's what we're aiming for with the hindrances a little bit. Let's open it up to some questions. Questions that feel relevant to your practice wherever that is right now. Whatever you're working on, whatever you're... I keep forgetting that phrase, learning edge playground, or something I've said about the bigger picture, that maybe, how does that fit together, or whatever. I actually had a question I could start with, but why don't we... I'll come back to it. I'll remember this from Andy, wherever Andy is. There you go. Maybe we'll come back to that if that's okay. Anything, please, anyone? No, I can't see it. Is that Lauren? It is Lauren. Okay. Yeah, please. Let me just repeat it, if I understand it. Lauren's noticing a cyclic pattern of over-effeting, and when that pattern is there, it's very convincing to believe that you have a really major problem with that, with getting stuck in over-effeting, and that you need to back way off. What's the question then? Okay, so needing some moral support and some skillful ways of working with it. Yeah. Okay. Moral support, I don't know if it helps you, but certainly a pattern that I can relate to. Certainly a pattern I can look back over the... I have to remember how old I am, over the last 36 years, and say, yeah, I've really been in that in different ways, in different modalities of practice, and really, yeah, at all kinds of levels, and felt like I was stuck there, or felt like it was a real personality problem, and all that. I don't know if that makes you feel better or worse, but I look back at all that, and feel like for myself that, yeah, there was a lot of cost to it in different ways. There has been a lot of cost to it in different ways, but there's been more blessing than cost. I'm glad that over-effeting may come from a really deep love, and a really deep desire, and a really deep yearning for something. These are all really, really beautiful qualities. If you have something like that, then you have... Sometimes say to someone... I'm actually saying it to someone else who's here. It's like you've been given a really powerful horse to ride, and you have to learn how to handle that horse. You could have been given a little... I don't know if you've been to Dartmoor and seen those little ponies. They're very different kinds of animals, and handling one and handling the other. It's like... There's a tremendous gift here, but it takes longer to learn how to handle it. Does that make sense? That's one thing. It really can be learned in terms of how to harness the power of that, and how to let that willingness to really give yourself an effort, and apply yourself, and bring your intensity, and bring what I was talking about, this cohesion of mind, and energy, and desire, and let that really gather power. When we're talking about soul power and all that, it's a really great gift, and it takes time to learn how to let those things come together in a way that they're actually balanced, and it works. It's not a small deal. It's a big deal. As I've said in here, anyway, the whole question of effort is going to be around for everyone, in everyone's practice for the rest of their lives. For any serious practitioner, you bump into it. I would say any really serious practitioner is also going to find it really painful at time. It's not just the effort, it's also the wanting. There's an energetic side to over effort. I do this in something... Did I share in here? I can't remember. If I think back to the late 80s, or I said about that shaking movement stuff, I had a really long period of being stuck in that, and it got incredibly wacky. I mean, it was just bonkers. I was 21 or 22, and whatever it was. Of course, I was just really trying really hard. The teachers at that time had no idea what it was. It got really, really intense and very weird in terms of its manifestations. Went on for a long time. Going back now, I see that the principal causal factor there was slight over-effeting. There's an energetic side of this, and we really need to learn how to handle that. It can have very gross effects, or you can just feel like completely something just locks or something. Or it can have this weird... It looked like I was just completely a raving lunatic, but it has quite marked effects. Or it can have very subtle effects. Like I said, it's just a little bit too much effort, and it actually creates... It stimulates the mind to sink more and to get slightly distracted more. It's relatively speaking quite a subtle effect. But anyway, everyone's going to have to deal with the question of effort. And I'll share something else. I remember being on long retreats here, and just in terms of wanting something so badly and not being able to find the answers, and finding that so difficult in tears. That didn't have felt like I didn't have anyone to ask or anyone who would give me answers that would satisfy. So it can be intense when we really give ourselves to something. It can be really intense. To me, it's still a good sign. It's just saying, okay, you've got a powerful horse you've been given. Let's learn to ride this. I would have to hear a bit more, Lauren, about what ways you're feeling stuck and what you mean by backing way off. When we talk about working with effort, we've got a huge range. One is backing way off, which means that just stop meditating. Stop whatever you're... Sometimes it's a fretting about question. Sometimes it's an energetic... Just take half a day off and go for a walk. That's pretty rare, but that would be backing way off, for example. Stop backing way off can look like... I'm just sitting here, but I'm going into a very different mode in terms of my relation with whatever the principle object I'm working with, whether it's PT, whether it's breath, or whatever it is. Or it might mean going to an insight practice for a while, but I've still got my mind... I'm still doing samadhi. That's my intention. I'm just taking this kind of detour into a practice I know brings a lot more ease, and it's within a much larger context. Or it could be finding an imaginal image that you've worked with in the past that has been helpful in this relation. That's not... Really, in terms of samadhi practice, again, Newton-Abbot can then become not just PT, it can become whatever it becomes. There are lots of ways there, and if it looks like, well, right now I'm headed in the wrong direction to Newton-Abbot, it might look like that, and the bigger picture, it really doesn't... It's really not. If you go into some imaginal thing that kind of changes your whole relationship with being on retreat and what you're doing, that might be really exactly what's needed. It looks like a detour. It looks like you're given up, so maybe you haven't. Some part of your consciousness is firmly got the intention and the navigation and where you're going in mind, and it's just very skillful to go off into something else for a while. Does that make sense? Do you want to say a bit more about the specifics, or is it better something to work with one-to-one in the interview, do you think? I can say it a little. Okay. Okay. So, if I understand... So there's fear in the larger picture that you've been asked or told to wipe back way off, and maybe that same thing will happen on this retreat, and I will say don't meditate, and maybe it's better if you go back home or whatever at that scale. To address that first, I've very rarely done that as a teacher. I would be extremely surprised if that wouldn't be my usual way of teaching, so I don't think that's going to happen on this retreat. In terms of grabbing at the PT, so the other thing you said was... Well, the other... Before we get there, the fear is not a neutral factor. It's not like this thing is happening and the fear is there, but it's not affecting anything. The fear actually is quite... When fear is present and when it's strong fear, it's doing something. When we talk about part of these, what look like detours, it might actually be like working with the fear in different ways. We can also maybe talk about that in an interview, but it sounds like the fear at this point is strong enough and prominent enough and probably having quite some effects that that itself needs working with. It needs understanding, something in you needs reassuring. You need to be able to diffuse the power of the fear. It's energy and it's contraction and the belief in the thinking, so there's different parts to fear. There's energy, there's the cognitive component, what we're believing, what we're afraid of and the contraction. One thing is to work with... Again, we can meet in an interview with one of us and really go into that. Actually work in real time with the fear. As I said, it's not just... It happens to be there. It's not a neutral factor. It's doing something. Almost certainly what it's doing is not helpful in the mix. In terms of when there's PT grabbing at the PT, this is really quite common to some degree. I think I mentioned it briefly in one of the talks. The Buddha took the trouble to say exactly that. Why would he say that? Just partly because he must have encountered it a lot as a teacher is my guess. It's normal. Two things just for now. I think it would be good to meet one to one, but let me just say two things for now. One is, is there access at times to lovely states? Not necessarily jhani, but lovely states other than the PT that are much softer or warmer or a bit more expansive or something like that. Yeah. At times you're able to ask the question what's pleasant and find a mild pleasantness. Does that mild pleasantness have a quality of softness to it? Because PT can sometimes also be a bit intense and that's also sometimes part of the issue. It does. That's good. The softness itself is not a neutral factor. It's softening something. That's the thing about jhanas. This is the whole thing about marinating and resource. Whatever the jhanic quality is, it then affects the chitta and the body. If there's something soft and warm and maybe even soothing that's lovely, then actually hang out in that. Take your time with this. Hang out in that. Feel that touching the heart, touching the body, touching the consciousness, etc. Sometimes you may want to then put the fear in that. Take the fear, the idea that you've had and put it in the middle of that whatever your language would be of this soft, warm space and just see what that does. Put the two, the difficult and the lovely into contact with each other. Other times, and you don't need to rush this, you could see if you can hang out in that soft place and really the second thing I want to say with all this is snatching is this kind of movement. Although it looks like a movement that I'm doing, it feels to you right now that you're not in control of it. The mind is just grabbing beyond your will. Is it possible that the more sunbathing posture is, you can spend a lot more time there. Both with the softness and then I think that's quite key to go into that and practice that posture so that becomes that stance, that poise with what's lovely. Over time that just becomes maybe that resets the habit. The habit is not so much immediately to grab forward but it's also to soak it up which is a very, or much less doing, let's put it, much less doing. You're training the habit so that they become more equalized and eventually you will have autonomy because they're equally available possibilities. They've both been practiced equally and therefore you can begin to choose. With that then you can really soak up that soft whatever it is. Let's not even worry whether it's jhanic or not jhana. It doesn't matter. It's a skillful state and you want to be tuning into the very softness, the warmth, the healing. There's something that reassures the whole system, the whole nervous system, the mind eventually. But you're really just lapping it up like really soft gentle water just lapping over the being. You understand? And then when you got used to that at times maybe then you can see if the PT can come up and you have the same stance poise in relation to the PT. And when it goes out of that, see if you can, the mind might quickly want to panic a little bit, oh here it is again, my over efforting and all that stuff very quickly gets ignited. But if I could just keep bringing it back to this more open receptive sunbathing showering poise relationship mode of attention. So you also have to think about your retraining the kind of, again it's a very sort of basic level of the mind in terms of the sankara doing that or that grabbing movement is a very sort of base level mind movement. And so retraining often happens just by over and over and over and over and over and over doing something different. Then we notice it diffusing that by doing the opposite, diffusing that by doing the opposite. So partly just knowing that's what you're doing, it will come up, this habit will come up. You're going to encounter it so many times you can't count. It's like okay can I not freak out and just is it possible to just switch the mode in that moment? And let's see how that goes. But come for a, well you'll have a meeting with one of us soon anyway but let's bring that to the interviews because there's lots of, you know it gets very individual, there's lots of detail here that this sort of so much depends on micro moments and micro choices at a kind of subtle level. But how does that sound for now? Yeah? Okay that's really good. Good, good, good. Mikhail, yes? So Mikhail is asking, hadn't heard much about the absorption which I mentioned as one of the elements of this sassy and thought he would try that, try focusing on that and pick the second genre or that's where your playground is anyway. Okay? And said okay let's see if I can get absorbed and then did indeed after a bit of work find himself very absorbed in this state, very deep state but the happiness he noticed at some point had gone and also any sense of energy body experience. So if I ask you what was prominent in your consciousness at that point? No happiness, no energy body, what was it? Okay, okay. So yeah this is definitely possible. There's two possibilities really within that. So one is that we, what happens is the mind does get more absorbed, more concentrated, whatever we say and actually goes beyond the second genre into either into a less fabricated state. I have to explain this at more length, I've mentioned it a couple of times but and there's no longer the fabrication of the perception of happiness. So it might have gone into something like the fourth genre where there isn't the fabrication of perception of happiness nor and then it might have gone even beyond that. As you say it's quite vast and empty. It might have gone into the beginnings of one of the formless genres. No body sense, no dominant emotional sense really apart from kind of stillness or it might have gone into something akin to that that isn't strictly speaking one of the classical genres but it's in that sort of territory. So yeah it's very possible but if you want to practice, this is why I said, I think I said yes, if you want to practice this or that genre I need to know what's the factor in it that's the most important. And in the second genre it's happiness, unquestionably it's happiness. For me at least that's the way I would emphasize things. It's not even the fact that there's no thinking or whatever that secondary and I'll come back to that when we talk about the second genre it's the happiness. Now within the second genre the quality of the happiness, as I said genres are not one uniform experience, the second genre is like this every time you could take a snapshot and it's just the same thing. There's a whole range within the second genre so you get a very bubbly kind of happiness and a much much stiller happiness. Part of the art of really learning the second genre is getting to know that territory but also learning to keep the mind focused and fed by the happiness. So what can happen because it gets more subtle within that range the mind is actually not quite able to stay, it hasn't been trained in staying with that more refined object, that happiness. And it might because of past experience be actually more trained with staying with a big empty space, you know, even though technically speaking that's less refined, you know, that's even more refined. So partly what you can think of what you're doing in each genre is training yourself to really stay with and really absorb in the primary nimitta of that genre over its range. What that means and then the other thing is that in the first four genres that means, you know, happiness is an emotion, it's a mental quality but you really want to feel it in your body as well. So this double aspected nature of the primary nimitta is actually quite important in the second third and fourth genres particularly. So you do want, if you stopped a guy in the street in Newton-Habbert and just said, you know, I don't know, asked him to think of something that made him happy and then said, can you focus on that happiness? It would be the strangest thing most people would say, how do I focus on happiness? So we're actually learning to do that and part of what helps and part of anyway what is the nature of the Jhana because it's a Rupa Jhana is that we feel the happiness and we focus, we feel the happiness in the energy body as well as in the mind but what we're focusing on is the energy body experience of happiness as well as the mental that has to be there. So that if you think, okay, my job is, my playground is now the second Jhana, I really have to keep it within those bounds and for all kinds of historical reasons it might want to slip out of it, the mind wants something deeper, the mind is just used to going to big open spaces or whatever but I have to keep bringing it back and in terms of happiness, you know, the intensity of the happiness as well as its subtlety can vary. So sometimes in the second Jhana you're really talking about, you know, this over, over, you know, upsurge of joy, it's almost overwhelming and sometimes you're talking about almost like it feels like, you know, this underground spring that the Buddha was talking about is really the subtlest thing, it's the subtlest thread that you're paying attention to and your job, if that's your territory, is how can I keep paying attention to that? And by paying attention to it I keep it in that, in that realm, yeah? Does this all, how does this all sound? Exactly, yeah, the subtlety of the attention was probably not enough to stay with the subtlety of Sukkha as it got more subtle, subtle, yes, in, in. Silence, silence, you're just more sad, it's like. Sure, and you're probably more used to that silence a little bit in different forms. Again there's a habit of mind, it's just created a groove there. It's great, it's not, we're saying you're never gonna, we don't want you ever going there ever in your life, we're not saying that, we're just saying, okay, this is my playground, this is, eventually we want you to have everything, everything, all the toys and all the swings and everything. So, but it takes a certain training for when the happiness gets subtle, can I keep it on that subtle happiness without it sliding somewhere else, you know, and that's, that's a training. In terms of what you said about backing out, yeah, so you can back right out, open your eyes, that's, that's great, well done, you know, and then you come back again. In time you can do it much more subtly than that, you know, you can remember back a certain happiness that you can pay attention to and then just do it, do it again, you know, but you have to have enough experience with the happiness to be able to remember it back, you know, call it back. Or if you're familiar with the first Jhana, you can go back to the first Jhana rather than opening your eyes and all that, go back to the first Jhana, there's definitely by definition the bodily experience in the first Jhana that's more gross, you know, because the first Jhana is more, is less refined, more gross than the second Jhana. So you find that, hang out in that for a while and then see if it goes again by itself or you can just encourage it to go, yeah. So this kind of maneuvering as you meet different difficulties, that's all part of the art of it, I'll back up into a lower Jhana, sometimes even go, go forward and then come backwards, you know, which we'll talk about, yeah, but yeah, well done, that's great, that's great. Let me read Andy's note, is it okay Andy? The chitta wants to move towards peacefulness, towards peacefulness, a deep, delicious, beautiful, dark, juicy peacefulness, rather than pete or sukkha which have been around. I've been working with the peacefulness just as recommended, sassy, etc., and will continue to do this as it feels like what the mind, heart really wants, there was such a sense of relief when I let it. Is there anything else I should consider or do on this front, on this point, something like that? Yeah, you know, so each, is a part of the work play you want to do is get used now to that peacefulness. Okay, actually let me ask you a question first, would you also say it's got love in it? Love and grace, it has got love and grace in it, would you say it has a tenderness to it? Okay, it's got tenderness, would you say it has a kind of emotional warmth and almost by implication it does? Yes, okay, tick, tick, tick, okay, good, so it sounds to me like we're in the right territory, fab, great. So what you want to do is let yourself go, the mind really does have, it's like it wants to go somewhere and partly this is dependent on your past experience, you know, a lot of sitting in different places and all that. So yeah, let it go, let that be your primary playground even now and your job then is to really know that territory inside out and to me there's quite a lot to discover about a third genre, things start to get really quite interesting then in terms of the different aspects and levels of it. So rather than me tell you what to look for, let's, you just hang out there with the awareness, the sensitivity, noticing what changes and then you can report back and one of us can talk about it, yeah. Second thing is there's also what would you say particular challenges, particular subtle difficulties that are particular to each genre and there's some that start to arise in the third genre, also obviously some really beautiful stuff that starts there but some particular challenges that arise and again rather than me tell you what they are, you'll begin to encounter them as well, sometimes this happens and I wasn't quite sure what to do or whatever it is or this happened and I figured out what to do, whatever. So those are two things to watch out for as you're getting to know that. However, given the context of what we're doing, we've got this grid of the elements of mastery and then all the genres, how are you doing with first and second? Awfully, okay. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So the first and second genre have been terrible and not, well, what's that? Not even there, Pity and Suka have been there but first and second genre is just a blocked, a dead end, no three road, it just doesn't go there and then a lot of hindrances started to come and difficulty and then there was a sense that the mind wanted to go to peace and so this sense of where the mind wants to go, this is also part of the territory of long term genre practice and some people have a style of practicing genres, it's just I sit down and I just see where the mind wants to go and I just follow that. So I'm going to say, yeah, that's great, that's part of, and we also want to say, again, back to the horse analogy, it's like sometimes you just get on a horse, I don't know, do you ever get on a horse and just see where it wants to go? Does that, no, maybe it's a stupid question but I, Kirsten, does one ever do that? Yeah, okay. So that's a possible relationship with a horse ride but we also want the ability to, no, I want to go, I want to go to the bingo hall or whatever it is. So we want that control and sometimes, you know, I'm a bit, you know, often my answers to questions is should I do this or this? It's like yes, both. We want to have this range and so sometimes I just let go of control, sometimes I, no, I want to have the choice in the mastery. But here's one of these, this is the reason why I chose to read this out is because what might be needed here, okay, in the long term I do want the mastery of the first and second but how I get there might be different and it might well be that actually taking the third right now as your learning edge playground, really getting to know that and really hanging out in that, that's your priority, okay. After you've been sitting in the third and you're just like feeling really, really nice from it, then see sometimes if you can go back, backwards from the third. By that point, the mind has got a lot of what it wants in that particular scene. It's drunk from that particular beautiful well, yeah, it's had its submerging refreshing dunk in that spring, yeah. And then it's much more amenable to going back, you understand? And it might be, you'll have to see maybe it goes right back to, you know, you just have the intention to go back to the PT, maybe it's the sukkah, so you go back to the sukkah might be even easier because it's, it's, yeah, yeah, very good. So exactly, first of all, the third jhana has sukkah in it and so it's easier to get to a sense of sukkah. Secondly, the mind is just much, here's where my horse riding and I'm really stretching my horse riding. The horse hasn't been given the right water to drink, how's that? What's that? The right food to eat, yeah. Once it has, it's satisfied and it will go, if it knows the foods that way that it likes, the carrots are that way and you want to go to bingo and there's no, they won't let the horse in the bingo hall. Then, you know, once you give it the carrots, it's happy to go to the bingo hall. So that's one thing. It's also, as you said, the happiness is closer to the, now it might be that you just remember the happiness and it comes back. Another little trick you can, well actually if the happiness is there, it's fine. Sometimes people can't get back to the happiness and then we would offer something else, but I'll leave that for now. Then from the happiness, you can just remember in the second genre has sukka and piti and the first genre has sukka and piti. So you're just kind of, in a way, slightly shifting what you're bringing out of the mix, but again attuning to a quality in the mix amplifies it. I amplify the sukko, in the second genre I amplify the piti in the first. Then going back to that again will be much easier and the mind will be more amenable to that. Does that sound okay? Yeah, please. Yeah, no, not in the next few days. Marinate in that. That's your primary playground, but as you've already tried, as you already reported, the happiness that's prominent in the second genre is already available after you've marinated for an hour or two hours or whatever it is. So that towards the, after you feel like I've had a good, long, lovely, refreshing drink of the peacefulness, then try to come back in the happiness, but at the moment you can spend much, much less time in the happiness and the piti and let the peacefulness be really where you're hanging out the most. Eventually we want to, look, I don't think there'd be anyone who said the first genre is a better experience than the third genre. I mean unquestionably the third genre is a lovely era. Maybe there's someone, but it would be pretty unusual. So there's no arguing with that, but what we do want is a sense eventually that, gosh, they're all lovely. They're just lovely in different ways. And even the piti, which relatively speaking is gross, it's like it's really a treasure. So somehow, whichever way we arrive at it, we want to get back or get, if you haven't had it before, a sense that, yeah, the first genre is a really lovely place. The piti is a lovely thing. I have a really good relationship with it. So we're just kind of finding which way will help you get to that being the case. Does that make sense? Okay, very good. Very good. Anything, please. Yeah. Oh, should we try that? Yeah, let's try that. If you're happy to do that. Yeah, please. So I've been on a bunch of insight retreats and never deliberately spent time cultivating jhanas. And I believe I'm one of a few people who've experienced third and maybe fourth jhana as a result of just relaxing in the midst of an insight retreat and the mind wanting to go to a very peaceful place. In all of the experiences of jhana on and off of retreat, first of all, I've never really verified this with anyone, but it tends to have a flavor of like the floor kind of goes out from under me and I drop into a place that's very different from normal and sometimes incredibly peaceful, sometimes incredibly blissful. So I guess my first question is, well, you don't want us to ask, is that it? So I'm not sure if it's even necessary. Like if I'm on the right track in those experiences. Oh, you mean if they are the right experience? No, no, it's not that I don't want you to ask. Let's take our time with this. So I do really think it's important to differentiate between jhanas. Is that what we're talking about? Is that not? But I think all that stuff I was saying is just because people can get so hung up on where the division is and have I achieved is the relationship with that question is not so helpful. But it may be really fine. Is that the fourth are we talking about? So it's not categorically that I don't think there are rather people didn't get into. I absolutely do think it's important. That's that. You need to map out the territory for yourself. There are certain ways that people can relate to that. And that's quite common in a way that's kind of fed that's really not so helpful. So I would need to hear more about those experiences just based on what you said. And again, bring it to an interview. Are we in fact meeting today? We are. So bring it to bring it to the one to one. We'll find out a bit more about what's involved there. Because what can happen is for someone who's done a lot of insight practice, as the same before, it might be that one drops in because of the insight, mindfulness, letting go, letting go, letting go. Equanimity is a result of letting go. OK, you get that right? Equanimity is almost can be defined as the absence or the let's say the relative absence, the relative attenuation of pushing things away or trying to grab on. In other words, it's a it's a relative degree of letting go. And equanimity is a result of that. But another way of defining equanimity is a relative degree of letting go. And if you just keep letting go, aware, letting go, aware, letting go, aware, letting go, you will end up in some state of equanimity. Equanimity will arise. Yeah. Does everyone understand that? It's just yeah. Whether that state is a jhanic state of equanimity and technically speaking, equanimity begins in third jhana and goes all the way to the eighth actually. So we'll talk about this when we get to the former sthamsa. The Buddha sometimes describes the formless jhanas as kind of almost like perspectives on equanimity or things you do with equanimity. So where you are, I'd have to hear more. That's one thing. The second thing is whether it's an actual jhanic state of equanimity. So, you know, again, relative to the normal consciousness, any state of equanimity and stillness and peace and mind is quiet and is going to feel like, wow, you know, we still don't know whether it's a jhanic one. So we do need to map this stuff out. And partly we need to map it out because again, it might give us information about, okay, well, how do you need to move now? What do you need to prioritize? Where's your playground? How do we need to progress? I mean, a bit like Andy, what order are we going to move in here? Bottom dropping out from you. Yeah, that can happen. I mean, one thing that can happen in the fourth jhana is there's a real sense of sinking. Everything kind of goes down. In the fifth jhana though, the bottom can fall out. In some sense, the floor falls out, like in terms of because there's no solidity, it really feels like they've taken the floor away and there's just space, you know. So there's different kinds of bottom falling out. But we can explore more unless you have more now. That was sort of the setup for what's happening now. Oh, thank you. Sorry. I mean, I figured it was useful for people. What's happening now is nothing jhanic actually on this retreat. As far as I can tell, nothing like those experiences in any case. It feels as though at times there's plenty of PT, sometimes plenty of suka less often. And I will feel that kind of the beginning of that dropping that I'm used to and sometimes be able to even conjure it and it feels as though it's on the verge of entering a jhanic state. And what happens instead is that I'm confronted by more intense, I guess it sort of feels like energetic blocks in the body. So as the resolution is being turned up and the subtlety and the sensitivity is being turned up, that's what becomes prominent and it kind of pushes me out. So you're turning up the resolution at that point? What resolution? The sensitivity of the attention is going up. It's sort of like all at once goes up quite a bit. And how do you experience that? How do you know it's going up? What tells you that? The PT becomes much more intense, at least in the times it's happened on this retreat. There's a sense of the PT becoming prominent and physical form becoming less. It's sort of happening now if I just relax into it. And yeah, so physical form becomes less, PT becomes more and pretty pervasive over the body. But at the same time, unpleasant emotion becomes... Emotion or sense of energetic... The sensation that I associate with emotion, which I was calling an energetic block. But it's more of an emotion. Especially in this moment, it feels like sadness, but sometimes it just feels like a contraction without much emotion. So it's not always the same thing and it can be in different places in the body as well? It can be in different places. I wasn't realizing that sometimes in motion until now. So again, we're in the context of a genre retreat. So in another retreat, I'd give a different answer. But let's just say a few things for now. One is it looked like a little more opening could happen. In other words, that mode of more opening. So here's the PT. It was building, it was there, it was pleasant, and then more opening to it. And if there's movements, let it come out the top of the head, et cetera. Really go into that more hedonistic sunbathing mode. But really more. So really practice leaning into that more and more. I think that itself is going to make a difference. That's one thing. Second thing is in the context of this genre retreat, what we do with contractions and emotions that come up, remember I think I said this on an opening talk, where, okay, my first choice is not to get too involved in that. So I give my attention more to where it does feel good. So it might be, okay, there's some contraction here, but actually up around here, especially when I open, it starts to feel better. And then you can play with all the ways we're talking about spreading. It's like, okay, let me later join this nice feeling to this not so nice feeling, and just put them in contact with that imagery. All the things we listed might really work and be helpful there. On another retreat, we say sadness. Okay, can we go towards that? Can we open to it? Can we care for it? What does it need, etc. But the first choice on this kind of retreat is actually something else. So does that sound okay? Yeah. So really go, if you've got notes, go through all the things that we suggested. Third thing to say is, it's meta you're practicing with, right? I will say I haven't, I don't feel like I need to do it much of the day because usually there's enough PT to work with, that I'm more in the energy body with the PT. Okay, so that doesn't need much time with the base practice with the PT? Maybe a couple hours. Yeah, okay. Okay, so are there times when the PT feels pleasant or you're actually a bit ambivalent about the PT? There are times when it feels pleasant. Definitely. And relative to the times it feels like, well, I'm really not sure I like this. What would you say? I would say it's 10% incredibly pleasant, like 60% mildly pleasant, and then 30%, not sure. Okay, okay. That's not bad. So I was just wondering about whether you needed to bring in some of those other experiences that you had on the, some of those other states that you've gone into on the insight retreats and actually let that help, but that doesn't sound like it. It sounds like the PT's fine. It's just sometimes getting into, it's sometimes you want to be playing with the relationship with the PT. As I said, it looked a little bit like more opening would be the thing. And when I say more opening, you know, these things are really like, you know, we can have words like opening or paying attention, but you're really kind of, like I said, dial it up to 11, you know, if we're talking about opening. Yeah? So it's really, really kind of what does it mean to kind of maximally open my being and surrender and abandon. And just that relationship with the PT, you're in a different relationship. Everything is a dependent arising, meaning how, how we experience PT and what it does depends primarily on my relationship with it. It's not like, you know, so basically what we're, one way of thinking about what we're doing is we're playing with our relationship with the primary nimitta. That's all we're doing. And we're playing with our relationship with, you know, other things which allow the primary nimitta to arise. So coming into a different relationship with something will shape the perception of that thing. Yeah? So when we talk about this emptiness, dependent arising, playing with perception, we're talking about playing with the way of relating and noticing that the very experience, appearance, perception of this thing, in this case, PT, changes dependent on my relationship. That's not always the case that there's a formula, okay, you always need to go into this opening mode. So what we need again is this kind of willingness to be responsive to try this, to try that, ah, that's better. Okay. Or that begins to, oh no, or that suddenly makes it much better or just gradually makes it better. But the very sort of willingness to be responsive and really try different relationships. So it might be a lot of the time that it's more of that opening, you know, really, really go into the opening mode. It might be that that's just sometimes and other times it needs something else, you know. So how does that sound? Yeah? But we'll still talk later. Yeah? Okay, great. Great. Anyone, um, need any help with the hindrances or anything? Nicole, yeah. Oh, is it okay to take care? Thank you. I'm thinking of it as a hindrance. I think there's probably different ways to think about what happens and it happens for me on every retreat. But for this one, it's really turned up, which is that, um, I have a constant, um, conversation like I'm in an interview with one of you about the experience as it's happening. And in some ways I really like it because it's kind of the way that I'm, oh yeah, you said this, okay, I'll try that. It's so in part it's quite a positive thing because it's a way that I'm experimenting and playing. But it also gets exhausting. Like, there's a kind of a neurotic tendency to continue to keep doing that throughout the day. So I've been, since it's on this retreat, trying to play with it as a kind of restlessness of the mind and open the energy body from the top of the head and see if it could get more space around it. And also trying, um, the breathing and the counting in relationship to add more pegs. And also went on a walk and tried, ended a little inquiry around maybe some more psychological reasons why that might be. But it is really insistent. Okay. So when you say it's a neurotic tendency, does that mean that you feel, for instance, one question what I have is, do you feel like the tone of it is quite anxious? Or for instance, are you saying I'm trying to impress or I'm afraid how they're going to judge me or what's the, I'm just interested in those words neurotic tendency as opposed to just habit of mind. Yeah. And maybe it's more of a habit. Yeah. It's my sense. Yeah. So this is really, really common. Um, if it was more, it's like, Oh my gosh, I'm going to have an interview tomorrow with, um, you know, someone and heaven's always there. Sometimes delight in somewhat. There's sometimes delight in it as well. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm just kind of saying for the, for the teaching. Yeah. Um, if it was more that other one, then, then we would need to unpack a little more psychologically, et cetera. Um, you know, back to, uh, Arjun Jeff's translation of Vitaka and Vichara, this evaluative thought, you know, it may partly be your way of processing, processing and understanding your experience, you know, that that's part of what's going on. It does involve some kind of pondering and put, you know, that, so I personally wouldn't be too, too worried about it. You know, um, what might help is actually writing down your questions or, you know, very, very briefly, or you're explicit just by doing that, you're telling the mind, look, I got this. You don't need to keep rehashing it. It's there. I'll take it to the interview or whatever. Um, that might help just something like that kind of, uh, reassuring the mind that it will get dealt with, you know, in terms of a moment to moment level. Um, yeah, I really, again, we can make so many things enemies that don't need to be, don't necessarily need to be enemies. If I think of, oh, but this is all about stopping thought, et cetera, then it's going to be regarded as an enemy. I wouldn't, I just wouldn't go there. I don't think it's a problem. The only thing is that it feels like it's sometimes stopping absorption. Yeah. So what I was going to say on a moment to moment level is that, um, can I let it, so there's a difference between a thought arising and me being entangled in a thought and me being here's the thoughts going over there and it's dragging me along with it or I'm, I'm willingly going along with it. Yeah. So if you're not clear on that, just that's something to notice. What's the difference in a thought arising and, and actually being attached to a thought. So we get dragged along with a thought and we move with it. Well, oftentimes there's still PT while it's going and I can focus on the PT, but I have a desire for it to be quiet so that the PT can be more. I think is, yeah, I think, I think this again is like, it's totally understandable what you're saying. I just think in terms of strategy, um, it's like, uh, like I said, well, when my, um, I'm Jeff went, when, when my teachers started meditating, it was in a building site. I'm sure he had the desire that the, you know, whenever those machines are called, uh, demolition machines and all the rest of it that they weren't there, but that was just there. And so it has to be in the background or imagine we were here and there was just a radio playing and it's there and okay. Or we're having a conversation. There's a radio playing. It's just, okay, we'll deal with it. It's not, it doesn't have to be, we get into this, you know, if I get into too much desire of I wish that would just shut up, then actually my attention is going over there in, in not a very helpful way. So if I can come into a relationship with it's just, okay, it's just there. It's like a radio playing there may well be some useful material in it as I said about digestion and about what I need to remember and all that stuff. So you can, but you can take care of that by making the notes and in the moment or moment to moment, if you're trying for more absorption, just, just aim at what's the prominent thing and just get more, more and more into that. The other piece is remember what I said about that we're drifting. It's a, it's a subtle manifestation of restlessness and, and the way often man or one way of manifest is, is the mind does have more thought and it tends to follow those thoughts a bit more and sometimes that drifting is coming from too much effort. Okay, just a little bit too much effort is actually stimulating more thought in the mind and, and stimulating the mind to follow those thoughts. So it could also be an effort thing and then of course if I get into a desire for it to go away and, and absorb more too much, then that can just add to the over-effort, the usual thing is there's more thought I need to try harder. It may be the case in some, in some instances, but it may be exactly the opposite. There's, there's more thought, there's more of this kind of, you know, threads on reeling in the mind or whatever. And actually what I need to do is back off more, go into a softer mode, a more receptive, etc. So it could well be related to that as well. Yeah, that makes sense because I am also working with over-efforting and finding the retreat really tiring. So I get most annoyed with the voice when I'm tired. Yeah. Yeah. Look, this is just for everyone. This is hard work. Don't, you know, sometimes it just feels, as I said, sometimes it feels completely effortless and it's great and it's all wonderful. And then, but a lot of times it's going to feel like hard work. It's hard work, you know, for lots of different reasons and in lots of different ways. So, but it, oops, it might be that, just rescue this thing. It might be that, yes, just, just a little bit too much effort accumulates to become very tiring after a while. Yeah. But this, like I said, it's actually, it's not like, oh, when will this effort question go away and I can get into the real stuff? That is part of the real stuff. It's not going to end. It will just, it will actually just become subtler and subtler, this effort question. So we really have to get our view screwed on right about that as well. And so, yeah, it sounds like not that you need to stop meditating and go for walks or all that. So it sounds much more a question of subtle effort and learning to back off, learning to back off, which may be more about this opening receptive mode. It may be, yeah, stuff like that. Is that okay? Okay. Let me just share a note that I got, I think it was last night. So someone was blah, blah, blah. And then I just wanted to share some practice. As I was listening to your talk, I think this was yesterday, I kept noticing some contraction and dukkha in the energy body. Finally as you moved, moved into the Q&A, I decided to see if I could untangle or smooth out whatever was going on. Just a little reflection on emptiness and some long breaths opened up a beautiful peaceful tranquility. It was time for tea, but I continued to sit and my bladder suggested it was time to, it was really time to go. I was inspired by what you said about carrying the jhana around. So I thought, why don't I try that now? I made it all the way to the loo and after that through tea fairly slowly and into the lounge. I kept working, playing and reestablishing the jhana or perhaps more accurately the connection to the sense of tranquility. It was so easy, exclamation mark. I've really had a view of not being able to carry this kind of mindfulness concentration outside of the sittings very well. And it has been a source of some measuring and self judgment. I felt some of this heal tonight. So I just wanted to share that just, A, for example, of skillful working with something that was initially a contraction and then can quite easily, quickly, this thing about quantum shifts happening quite easy turn into something lovely and then a long term view of being inadequate or measuring oneself is not doing it. Actually something opens up and it's like, oh, actually this is possible for me. I can do this. So the content could have been different, but in terms of the, that general pattern, it's like not to believe this. I can't do this. I'm like this. I'm not built for this or whatever. It's so much an important part of this. It's like in time, confidence comes, confidence comes. This is really important. Oh, there was something else, but Boaz asked you to say that, a kagata. And I felt I could have said something else about that word. So that word usually translated as one pointedness, which I said was a good translation. It's just that in English, I think most people thinking of one pointedness would think of one narrow spatial point. And I said it better, the clumsy sounding translation would be with one thing prominent. And Boaz asked, well, why is that a significant factor in the jhanas? In the Abhidhamma, as I said, in the Buddhist, Theravada Buddhist psychology, maybe in the Mayana as well, they would say every moment of mind has something that's prominent in it. The difference in the jhanas is that a jhanic state continues. It's a moment after moment after moment after moment. So jhana, that word is related is from the Pali word jayati, which means to burn. And so people use that, a jhana is like a candle burning steadily, or they write jhana will burn up your defilements either way. So, but the point is, it's something continuous. And so this ekagata, what makes it characteristic of jhanas is it's moment after moment, the same thing is prominent. So there's a kind of temporal extension of what's prominent, if that's clear. Yes. Yes, I think it's ekagata. And if you, in the first edition of my book, I completely mistranslated it. So I changed it in the second edition, so I had missed the double G and I translated ekagata, gone to oneness, like unified. That's wrong. It's actually due to one prominence. So I made that change. Okay, anything else? Yes, who's that there? You're moved. I'm noticing that I keep falling in some stages. I don't know if it's a jhana or not, but I find this very tiring and very intense. And I feel I can't stop it. And right now I was for kind of going, it's like a pulling. I get pulled into some stages. I don't really know. Yeah. Okay, so like we've been saying, that sort of thing can be quite normal. We can get pulled into a hindrance, we can get pulled into a jhana, we can get pulled into some other state that's more familiar because of our meditation habit. So again, I would probably say, come to a one on one and we'll really try and identify what those states are because that identification will help us, will help guide us. Okay, how do you need to move from there? Sometimes it's not a bad thing. It's just, okay, now we're here a lot. How do we move from there? Other times it's like, okay, we need to maybe help it not go there, in which case we need to try and do this and this, but we need to probably hear more about what it is, what those are. This sounds quite helpful to know what it is and then to go. Yeah, so bring it to a one to one interview and we can really hear more about it and get all of them or whatever, if there's more than one, and get used to get a sense of what it is and that will guide us in terms of how to respond. But that sort of thing is very normal. Yeah. Thank you. Good. Good. Oh, yeah, I already said it, but just to say, if the PT is really strong and feels very sexual and like an orgasm, it's really, really completely okay and just enjoy it, really get into it. Is that what you're... Just really... So you see what Robert's going to bring to the retreat? No, it's really important because we have this, this can't be right or we feel like, oh, am I maybe emanating some kind of weird sexual energy into the hall, it's going to pollute the pure guy house pristine atmosphere of renunciate celibacy and all that. It's completely not an issue. It's just a manifestation of PT, open to it, enjoy it, all the whole same thing applies. There's absolutely no shame in it. It's something to open to and get into and it's doing good stuff. It's really good. Yeah. I think... I can't see who that is. Okay. So, did Danny have one? Okay. Okay. Sabra, please. Just a clarifying question. I feel like I remember hearing you say, like, warn about elation and I'm wondering about the difference between elation and excitement and happiness and sukha. Yeah. Thank you. Yes, I don't need to repeat that. So the difference between elation, excitement, happiness and sukha. I don't know. That elation, I'd have to look up the original Pali and whatnot. It was something that Buddha, when he was talking to a small group of super advanced meditators who were working on psychic power meditation and stuff like that. One of the things they were doing was, what's it called, the clairvoyance, the sort of, seeing far away in their meditation. One of the subtle hindrances was either you get excited at being able to do that or what's opening up or its new territory or what you're seeing, you know, or whatever. So I don't know the Pali offhand and I'd have to find it. I don't know. But my sense of it is it's something like excitement is probably the closest thing. Excitement's an interesting thing. So if there's too much excitement, it can lead to this snatching, for example. It's also, it can cause a certain amount of agitation that disturbs the serenity. For those kinds of, we're really not going to talk about it at the century, but for those kinds of powers and whatnot, it needs a very still mind, super, super still. So any kind of excitement there is just going to make the waters a little bit turbulent. So it's going to be a hindrance relative to that. So that's my guess is what the Pali kind of translated, I don't know, but that's my guess. But excitement itself is quite an interesting, it's almost like an energy, like all these things we go back to what I said with Jason. Thank you. It's you know, sometimes people come to me and they say, I have fear about X or Y. And I'm wondering if this is fear or excitement. It's actually excitement and the mind is relating to it in a certain way and labeling it a certain way that it actually becomes fear, becomes an experience of fear. But at its root, so to speak, if we, it's not a good word, but let's use it for now, at its root, it's actually excitement or more naturally, it's actually excitement. So they have to learn to play with the relationship with it so that it can become excitement. And actually the excitement can be energizing, empowering, galvanizing, give you courage, all kinds of things. But excitement itself can also kind of wobble, wobble in different ways. So an excited energy could become bubbly happiness or pity. You know, it's quite, so all these things are quite close. And partly, you know, the different modes of relating to something like excitement will again shape the very perception. So it becomes something else. Like there's no excitement, a pity, for example, a very close. And actually, there's probably times when pity has even been in the tradition of translating Pali to English, even been translated as excitement, I imagine, I think vaguely remember. So it's very close, you know, and I would say part of the experience of the first Jhana, especially at first, is excitement. It's super exciting, you know, for lots of different reasons, but the energetics of it, but also the sense of, wow, this is, look what's happening. But the point is we can come into different relationships with the energy of excitement, and that will actually, because of dependent rising, because everything depends on the way of looking, there's no independent appearance of anything, it can shape it. So it's in itself, it's a very, it's open to malleability and you can shape it towards pity, maybe you can even shape it towards sukha. Sukha, I usually translate as happiness, just I was thinking, I'm not sure what Karen had in mind when she asked yesterday, but just because that seems to me the most, the closest word in English to sort of encompass the territory that includes, but as they're looking back at, I don't have them here, but looking back at some of the English translations over the past, say, 30 years, there's been all kinds of different translations of pity and sukha, and some of them even reverse what each means, and I find that a bit baffling, but I think probably as time has gone on, it's gotten more consistent. So I use that word happiness to translate sukha, but you'll see as well, when the third jhana opens, the kind of happiness that's characteristic of the third jhana, it's still technically sukha, but most people will never have experienced that kind of happiness, it's super serene, and it's almost otherworldly, you know, not almost, it really feels like otherworldly kind of happiness in its flavor and texture. But I just use that word because it seems to me the most sort of, the broadest sort of most stretchable word in English to cover what the different ranges of what sukha might mean. So sukha, excitement, pity and elation, does that? That's great, very helpful. Okay, good. I think last one, and then is that okay, Danny? So that was helpful, actually, because I've been experiencing a lot of that kind of excitement today. Yes. Getting in the way of my clairvoyance. And so like you said that we need to train attention at each level of subtlety. So I'm really noticing that it's like also with like a lot of pity, there's a particular kind of papancia that comes with pity, like this kind of very inspired ideas, which seem really great. And I think they are, but they're a distraction from the point. So that's just, that's kind of one part of what's going on. My base practice has also mostly been metta. And it seems like as there's a shift to more subtlety, the kind of habitual way of practicing metta doesn't work in generating the qualities that I associate with metta. So there's been this exploration of, well, how do I practice metta at a different, at this kind of level of subtlety? So it's kind of one alive avenue of exploration next to just, and maybe like moments of success, not a lot of kind of sustained like, oh, I've got that now. There's just kind of generally a lot of pity, but it's just this kind of energy and sometimes with more kind of blissful or whatever. And so then also the question of like, well, if that's not working, and it feels like every time I try and do that, I'm kind of like trying to squeeze something and it's not like I'm trying to use a gross practice at a subtle level. So maybe I should just abandon that and just go with the PT or do something else. Okay. So let me see if I understand this and take, let's take the questions in the reverse order. Okay. So, yeah, everything, everything changes, you know, I mean, in a certain way, things get more subtle, and then I have to learn how to, how to work with that different level of subtlety. So even if this wasn't a genre tree, if it was a meta-tree, I would expect things to get more subtle and you'd have to, okay, what do I do now that things are more subtle. If there's a lot of pity, at that time in the context of a meta practice for jhanas, you'd have a couple of choices. Okay. One choice would be, okay, let the meta go at that point, let the meta intention go. And if the PT is at least strong enough, you know, that it's definitely pleasant and stable enough, you know, it's there for a few minutes without disappearing and coming back, then you can work with the PT directly and forget about the meta, let the PT become the principal thing. Okay. The second possibility, which is, would be confined to if this was a meta-retreat and not a jhana-retreat would be that the PT itself then becomes, that is the meta. In other words, I'm feeling some really lovely stuff here. You have some. You have some. And you radiate it out. And anyway, you're bathing in it. So it's not like you get it and I don't, so if I'm having the PT. So the PT becomes the flavor of the meta and that's what you imagine radiating out. So like I said, if this was a meta-retreat and our intention was not to go to jhanas, or you know, if this was a long enough meta-retreat, everyone would be experiencing PT and sukka and all the rest of it. And it would just be, okay, that's the flavor of the meta right now. So that's what I'm radiating. In order to radiate it, I still have to feel it. You know, at least that's the way I teach meta. I wouldn't just trundle through the phrases at that point. This is actually, this is the flavor that I want to share with you. This is why, and if that's super serene subtle happiness like sukka or the third jhanas, that's still the flavor of the meta. So I actually have to feel that, feel my energy body and it's radiating out from every pore of my being, from the whole energy space. And you know, you can kind of do this and imagine it coming from your hands, you know, that sort of thing. So you get used to integrating the meta, the PT and the bodily experience. If you want to keep the meta around, when you want to do that with the PT, other times just get into the PT. Now if it's a question, well it's not so much PT, but there's more subtle manifestations of meta around. I don't know how to work with them. I don't know how to, is that, was that? Unfortunately, not. Because it's like I can't conjure meta. Like it's just kind of general well-being, but I can't bring up like that, those qualities at all almost. Of meta? Yeah. Okay. So again, except, sorry, just like not so much informal practice, but if I'm like walking around and I have occasion to hold the door open for somebody, then that just like deeply touches my heart. Yeah. Yeah. Lovely. So it may be, Danny, that the, it's a question of intention. So on this retreat, the fact that you just told me that there's wellbeing there, but there's not the meta, not a problem on this retreat, because you're going with the wellbeing. If it was a meta retreat, we'd be like, well, okay, how do we get the meta back? So you have to kind of remember your intention. Remember what I said about intention on the opening day. It makes so much difference and even just a subtle kind of bifurcating or shift in the emphasis of the attention to, I'm worried about my meta now. Don't worry about your meta. You have plenty of meta. You can worry about that on a meta retreat, about developing that more and more, but A, it's not something to worry about for you, and B, it's not something to worry about on this retreat. So it's the wellbeing and you can let that be more primary. Does that answer the question? I think so. Yeah. What about the subtlety business? I didn't, uh, yeah, I think you spoke to it. Okay. In terms of the first thing, yeah. So where there's PT, there's often excitement and there's often all kinds of creative, uh, ideas about projects that I'm going to do and stuff like that. Because there's even more than that, there's actual, uh, don't know what you'd call like creative, not just the idea to do something, whatever, but actual, you know, you start hearing poetry or music or whatever. Second Jhana, some, for some people even more, it's almost like this spring that the Buddha talked about can be a spring of inspiration and, and, and creative. You can kind of plug into something. Um, in a way, any, well, any of the first four at least, but, um, so this is a big deal again, I, I, you know, I hesitated to even say that why I just said, but again, really my invitation and hope and wish to stress we're on a Jhana retreat. Okay. At some point in your life, when you've developed a bit more of this Jhana business, um, you might decide to take a retreat where you actually meditate for a bit, get in touch with that inspiration, write whatever it is that's coming, poetry, whatever it is, go back to the meditation, do that and actually do that. That's great. You know, doing that now will kind of pretty much abort your progress in Jhana's. Um, so my, yeah, I think personally my real hope is that you'll, you'll all keep the intention. Like that's, that's why I'm here. Um, that's what I'm hoping to serve and support, but you can, you know, if you get into this, there's no reason why you can't have another retreat at another time. You go somewhere and for a week or whatever it is you're, you're playing with that. And that's actually, but that's your intention. And then that's clear, you know, here, if you really, if you really want these treasures to open up, you have to, it's what I said on the opening talk, there's something very, very powerful, much more powerful than we realize about keeping the intention really clear. Um, and kind of single and steady and you say metta is a great intention. Um, even creative products and what it is, but creative, they're all great intentions, but too many great pulling in too many directions. You'll end up with, you know, not so much. Connects to me to what you said, which I found really a galvanizing around this kind of soul like gathering of soul power. Yeah. Yeah. Um, exactly. There's a lot of, yeah. Anyway, that's good. Yeah. Okay. Great. Great. Let me just see. Do I have anything else? No, I think that's okay. So why don't we just have a few quiet moments together? Thank you. Okay. Thank you all. Time for tea. And see you soon. Please consider supporting DharmaSeed with a year-end gift. Your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all. Visit dharmaseed.org slash donate to learn more. And thanks.

 Yeah, so Karen's asking about the interpretation of PT being primary in the first genre and sukkah being primary in the second genre and also the translation of those words. Yeah, no, as far as I know that's not in the Pali Canon that PT is primary and the sukkah is secondary. As far as I know, they're both factors of both the first and second genre as far as I know. I guess I'm just speaking from experience, also from how I was taught originally, or one of my teachers in fact. So I'm just speaking from the way experience tends to mature. I think even for people who are not told what to wait for or don't even know what they're supposed to be looking for, it would just tend to mature that way. As for the translations, yeah, it's interesting reading. Sometimes you get delight or pleasure or joy or all kinds of different translations. So I'm just speaking from experience about PT as predominantly felt physically pleasure, although it's a perception and sukkah's predominantly happiness that has a lot of wavelengths. Boaz, is that Boaz? Yeah. So Boaz is asking, in terms of this word ekagata, the way I translated it, what makes it special as a jhanic factor versus a factor that might be present in any insight practice? So actually in the abhidhamma, which as I said is kind of very, I don't know what you would think, but very sort of black and white definitions about factors of consciousness in Theravada Buddhism. Actually Mahayana also has their own version. They say ekagata is a factor that is present in every state of consciousness. So not even just in meditation or just in jhana. The mind always has one thing prominent to some degree. So it's a question of how much is one thing prominent. Then you would tend to think, okay, well the ekagata of the eighth jhana must be better than the ekagata of the first jhana, but not necessarily. It can vary. I would say it can vary. But basically it's just a factor. It's a fact of being conscious of having a perception that there's one thing that's kind of more prominent in the perception. So it's not particular to samadhi or jhana practice. It gets developed more in jhana practice. It becomes a kind of an important, it becomes developed in a jhanic state or samadhi state. But it's something that's there anyway in any moment of consciousness. It means that, well, it means it gets stronger and stronger or you make it stronger and stronger. So a jhanic state is very absorbed. There's really just one thing. It's like you're really into that thing more and more. So the question is, you've been told to sort of stay in the first jhana as much as possible, what other states are coming up and is it okay to go there? Should I go there and just trust them or not? And I want to go there. They're much nicer. Yeah. Can you describe what they are? What's going on? What kind of? Very settled. Yeah. Okay. So I was describing a place where it's sort of like white velvet and very settled and like the breath of God is there and very lovely. So again, it's about context. So you could, if we're looking at things from a jhana land, say of everything you just said, and we sort of map that onto a jhana territory, which are the significant nimitres there and which are the less significant nimitres? So if we're doing imaginal practice, soul making practice, then actually it's the breath of God. That's the most significant thing there. And the fact that it's velvety is great and the fact that it's serene is great, but actually it's the breath of God that is most significant. If you're doing jhana practice, then actually what's most significant is the serenity there. So it might be from what you're saying, we have a longer conversation. It might be that the serenity there is something akin to something in the third jhana. It's much more kind of subtle and exquisite and lovely that way. It might be. We'd have to have a slightly longer conversation. But if you want to go into that and explore it, it's almost like that needs to become the primary jhana factor, the serenity. And it might be that the sense of the breath of God and the white velvet support it for a while, but after a while they'll become kind of secondary. And you realize, oh, it's a territory that is characterized primarily by that kind of serenity. And you recognize its particular bandwidths and those other factors are secondary. But it depends what you want. If you want jhanas, then it depends what we emphasize, what we pull out of that mix of what's most important. It's funny, I only know you from really from maginal practice. I don't know what else you've done in terms of insight practice and all that, but it could be like I said today, it could be that for you there has been a training where the mind goes a lot towards a kind of serenity and doesn't really like all this kind of bubbly stuff like that. So again, even you decide, actually, I'm not really into the jhana practice. I want to make this an imaginal space. I guess my request would be not on this retreat, but you can come back to that. You'll have plenty of access to all these kinds of things at other times. If you do want it to be jhana, then the question becomes, okay, which first, which should I develop first or should I even develop these things in parallel? So demarcate, really get used to, okay, that as you're doing, this state is definitely different than this one. I prefer that one, but I'm actually interested in mastering them both and being able to hang out with them both and finding them both lovely. And either you decide, okay, well, I'm going to do this first and that second or that first and that second, or I'm going to do them kind of in parallel. Does that sound okay? But so to me, there's nothing wrong with experiencing the breath of God there and all that. It's just that if that becomes primary, it's technically speaking, it takes you in a slightly different direction, which is gorgeous and beautiful, incredibly fruitful, but it's slightly different than what we're doing. So it can be there as a support for a while and it might be, but at some point you have to kind of hone in on what's the primary factor in any state. Does that answer? Yeah, so this is one of the things, it's hard as I said, doing a retreat over time and kind of what you need to do is come to an interview and describe in a bit more detail and we could map the jhanas on those and that will tell you what to make more primary in each state if you want to develop the jhanas. And then exactly the order in which you sort of go develop your mastery of those, if that's what you want, that kind of is partly dependent on your history and things like that. But yeah, I guess this is one of the situations where you would need to have a bit of a map to tell you because there's actually an infinite amount of lovely states that a human being can find themselves in. When you start including soul making stuff it becomes completely infinite. So it really depends, it's like certain honings or certain magnetism to this or priority of this will direct you in certain ways. And you know, if you ask me is it better or worse or whatever, it's not really about that, it's just what do we want to do right now. Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah, I can't see who that is at the back, is it Sabra? Is there a reason I haven't listed out the eight jhanas? And yeah, I did. One of the first two talks, but very quickly. Yes, so I think the way I'm thinking about it is okay, we're thinking mostly about PT and the first jhana and then I'll give more detail about each jhana. But that's just one way of going about it, I guess. Is there a reason? Mostly because that's where most people will be at. Well I read them very quickly. Why would you want that to give you a sense of whether you're slipping into something or other else right now? Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's interesting. I guess we could have done it that way. I would usually do that in an interview with someone like I described, but it might be that it would take quite a lot of description from me at the front of each one for you to get an accurate sense of is that it or where is it. So I'm not sure. Maybe one time, well I probably won't get the chance, but that would be another way of doing it. I think it would take really quite a lot of description because there's a lot of states, like when I talked about some people who've done a lot of insight meditation, get into a state of equanimity, and then I said, oh I actually have to explain a few things about equanimity because for example the Buddha talked about equanimity based on singleness, equanimity based on multiplicity, and then there's equanimity in relation to the eight worldly conditions, and then there's just equanimity as a kind of almost a jhanic state based on multiplicity, almost a jhanic state based on singleness and stuff. So it might take quite a lot to kind of put all that out there and then for you individually to sort of figure out where you are on that map. But I guess it's another way of doing it, yeah. I don't know. What do you, what do you, I'm not sure. What do you think? Yeah, but it is, like I said, in individual teaching that would be a real, that's quite a common thing for me and I'm just listening and I'm picking up the signals and I would ask questions and stuff like that. I think teaching a group this stuff, teaching a group to do jhanas this way with the whole idea of mastery and marinating is, yeah, it's quite a sort of strange thing to do. That's what I mean, yeah. Yeah, that's what I was trying to say before, yeah. It's like it would take quite a lot of explanation and the different sort of shades. You know, it's something like this that you may have experienced but actually it's a bit different and so I don't know. I feel if I do it now I'd just be rattling them off again but I'm not sure what the point of that is but do you want me to? I don't know. Would it be helpful or bring it to individual interviews, yeah. Okay, Monica, yeah. Do you think this whole practice takes a lot of energy, a lot of energy. I mean it brings a lot of energy but it takes a lot of energy so I think I said that at one point. It really does, much more than you think. So even when you've got the PT there and this kind of subtle work and sustaining it, it somehow at the same time delivers a tremendous amount of energy but it takes a lot of energy. So absolutely. The question is, okay, here's this PT and do I need to go back to the base practice or is there a way I can just minutely change the way I'm working with it that actually it's more sustainable. So there's not always such a black and white answer but generally if you feel like you're getting tired, yeah, it's either time to rest or time to maybe do the base practice but it might be eventually when you do a lot of this practice, you know, say, okay, here I am working on, you know, playing in the second genre or whatever and it's getting a little tired and I just go to the seventh genre and come back and now I've got loads of energy. So it's not necessarily you always go, there's the thing about this, it's not always so formulaic or it might be I'm trying to, in the fourth genre it's getting a little bit down and I go back to the first genre and that gives me energy or I go back to the press. So I don't know that there are formulaic answers really and that's to me part of the whole improvised thing with it but yeah, does that? But certainly, well it could be I just stay with what I'm doing, whatever it is, the PT, whatever and there's a way of getting more energy there, finding more energy or not and then I have to do something different. Yeah? Okay, maybe last one, did someone else? Is that Nicole? Yeah, so Nicole's asked sometimes with the different kinds of PT, she experiences, there are sort of corresponding different images like a snowflake or something that kind of seem to go with that image and the image can kind of help trigger or support that PT and the question is, is that okay? Can I kind of go with the image or do I need to drop it as soon as possible and that sort of thing? Yeah, this is very common actually and I would say it's again, it's a matter of intention so the images can be there as I say in the background but as long as they're helpful, you know, they're supporting, if they're supporting the PT and helping you get into it more, it's great, it's no problem, they're in the background and you can play with how much you get into the PT or how much the image goes. Sometimes if you want, the image is quite primary for a while but yeah, really what the primary thing needs to be is the PT so it would be a little bit secondary but it might kickstart things, you know, and eventually you don't need so much of those kickstarts. Like I said, it just comes so you just remember the PT and what you're all going to learn is lots of little tricks for all the different stages here. So you'll learn lots of tricks to get you from the first to the second genre. I can give you some and then you'll discover your own like a snowflake image or you know, lots of little things and after a while you just find I actually don't need them anymore. Other images might be just for a long time in your Jhana practice, they just, they go with that Jhana and they somehow just support it but they're very much in the background mostly but sometimes they can come a little more into the foreground to sort of ramp things up a little bit. Does that make sense? Yeah, great. Okay, very last one. If you're trying to go to sleep or if you're... Okay, so you're not talking about lying in bed and being troubled by PT that doesn't let you sleep, you're talking about when you're on the cushion and there's different kinds of PT, sometimes it's really strong and other times it's so relaxing that you're going to sleep. Yeah, two different things. Yeah, yeah. Okay, so yeah, there are different kinds of PT and it might also be though that... Well, a couple of things. So why don't we just say this, when the PT gets more relaxing and soft that way then your attention on it needs to change. Maybe it's more subtle, so again, maybe the attention needs to get more subtle, you know, and maybe the enjoyment of that smoothness, etc., there's quite a subtle attention there and a subtle way of enjoying it, you have to come into a certain stance with it, yeah. What happens as we go more and more into the jhanas is we learn to pay attention with more subtle objects, yeah, and we learn to sort of sustain our attention on more subtle objects. So that would be an example there. Yeah, that's part of the R. I mean it might be that another state is beginning to show itself and PT is actually not the primary thing there, it's a different body energy, but still it's like what is it to stay with that? And if you're actually falling asleep, you know, it's like how can I be really alert with this if that's there, yeah. Does that answer? Yeah, it's an art to really be awake with something that's subtler and calmer. Every level you have to kind of, your attention has to get trained at every new level, so that could be part of what's happening there, yeah. Okay, let's have just a little quiet time together. Okay, there's one announcement, yeah. And actually just one more thing with Brooks Anne's question. You know, all the things we said about subtle work and play might apply, so it might be that more opening needs to happen at that point. Again, sleeping, when we talked about the hindrances, sleeping is a kind of closing down, it's very comfortable and something just closes down, and actually you might need to open yourself with the idea of how can I enjoy this to the max, you know. So is it more sustaining, is it more opening, is it more maximizing the enjoyment? Again this question of what needs emphasizing now in the way that I'm working of all the possibilities, yeah, and finding what actually helps, but it might actually be more a question of opening and finding the enjoyment in it. So it's enjoyable, but actually I'm not maximizing the enjoyment, and I'm not opening to it in the right way, and that's what's kind of extending it into a sleeping process. Please consider supporting DharmaSeed with a year-end gift.

 So today I was planning to talk about the first Jhana, and then I... and then tomorrow I was going to talk about playing and working in any Jhana, but also out of any Jhana, or playing and working in and out of any Jhana. And then I decided actually I'll combine those two really because they kind of interrelate as two themes. So first Jhana, as well as playing and working in and out of Jhana in general, as one talk, and then after that the teachings will get a lot less dense, so there'll be a bit more breathing room in terms of how much material is... well, there should be a lot more breathing room in terms of how much material is coming at you. It's slightly complicated by the fact that I have a hospital appointment tomorrow, and I have no idea how long that's going to take, so I hope that it won't be complicated, that I can go there, come back and finish if I don't finish today, the second part of the talk. Maybe we'll finish today, maybe we'll have to get bumped till the day after tomorrow, maybe I can come tomorrow, so let's see how we do, but just so you know that. Am I forgetting something? No? Okay. Oh, Kedok, so first Jhana and playing and working in and out of any Jhana, really, mostly. So first Jhana, I've read this already, is the Buddha's... Let's start with the simile. Just as a skilled bath man or his assistant kneading the soap powder, so working the soap powder, which he has sprinkled with water, forms from it in a metal dish, a soft lump, so that the ball of soap powder becomes one... There's an English word here, I don't even know what it means, I think it means one oily mass. Bound with oil so that nothing escapes, so this practitioner, Sifuza's drench, fills and irradiates their body, so that no spot remains untouched, and fills and irradiates Sifuza's, etc., their body with what? With this, have to retry, with the piti and sukha, born of detachment. Detachment from what? Detachment from the hindrances. That's what detachment means in this case. So with this, it's funny, if you look at older translations, there's all kinds of different translations of piti and sukha, so I'm going to spend a little time on some Pali words today, but... So with this piti and sukha, born of detachment, detachment from the hindrances, or sometimes the seclusion from the hindrances, withdrawal from the hindrances, she so Sifuza's drench, fills and irradiates her body, that there is no spot in her entire body that is untouched by this delight, oh here we go, by this piti and sukha, born of detachment. So the soap simile is really a simile for what we do with the piti and sukha. Sifuza's saturate, steep, drench, irradiate, pervade, permeate, all these words. We do that with the piti and sukha. With the piti and sukha translates best, I think, as happiness, I would say. In the first Jhana, the piti is the primary quality, I'm going to come back to this. The sukha is there, and one is definitely not unhappy. One is conscious that one is happy, but actually even the consciousness that one is happy, very, very happy, might be a little bit in the background. One is more kind of taken by, captivated by, and should be concentrating on the piti. The piti is what is foremost in consciousness. So when in other, so the Buddha has these similes, and other times for each Jhana, he describes them in terms of their factors, what's called Jhana factors, Jhana-jhanga. So piti and sukha, two Pali words, they're two of the five factors of the first Jhana. There's five factors in the first Jhana. Piti and sukha are two of them. Another one is Ekagata, and actually it's a factor of every Jhana, Ekagata in Pali. This usually gets translated as one-pointedness. I've already touched on this. It cannot, it absolutely cannot. There's no way that it can mean putting the mind in a small spatial point. Now you might do that, in fact you probably will do that at times in a Jhana, if you're playing with this probing, receiving, open, directed, shifting of the modes of attention. But it cannot mean one-pointedness in a spatial sense, because it's a factor of, as I said, the fifth Jhana, which is infinite space. So you realize there's complete contradiction, right? If you take it as a spatial point, it doesn't make sense, right? So what does it mean? Ekagata, in the Sanskrit, Agra, and Ta is just a nes on the end, is one, I can understand why it's one-pointedness, it's something like a mountain peak or a prominence, okay? And of course some mountains are quite pointy like that, but what's best translated is something like, I think, one thing is prominent. Ekagata, prominentness. Okay, one thing is prominent. So what is that one thing that becomes prominent? And people argue about this, is it the original meditation object, is it the breath, is it the body that becomes prominent, the sense of the body, or is it the PT? I would say that in Jhana what happens is they all get mixed together, as I say, one becomes, I'm breathing PT if you're still with the breath, if the breath is still there, or the body has become PT, or it's just the PT is what's prominent. So I would say the PT is what's prominent. In a way it's the most significant factor of the first Jhana, let's say that. So PT is the thing that's most prominent to consciousness, not that other things, other aspects, other dimensions, or other aspects of the Jhana won't come into consciousness, they will. But the most prominent thing, and what should be the most prominent thing, is the PT. Okay, so PT and sukha, two factors, Ekagata, a third factor. I'm not saying these in the order they're usually presented. Then there's two more factors which get to in Pali, Vitaka and Vichara. Now most of you, if you've heard these terms before, any translation, you will hear, you will have heard translations, initial and sustained application. Who's heard that before? Really, really common, certainly what I was taught for many years. My original meditation, one of my original meditations, I was originally taught by a group of teachers, one of them was a professor of Pali, is a professor of Pali, so not professor of Buddhism, not even a professor of Theravada Buddhism, but professor of Pali. Okay, so that's his thing. And he said, that's not what it meant at the time of the Buddha. At that time, that's not how those words were used. Vitaka and Vichara just meant something like thinking. It was a double, in English, do we have a kind of double verb, you always say this and this. No, but I mean, as a phrase, it doesn't matter. So it was a stock phrase in Pali, and it just meant thinking. Originally, about 500 years after the Buddha in Sri Lanka, a guy, a monk called Buddhaghosa, wrote a book called the Visuddhimagga, which translates as the path of purification. In some Theravadan countries, it's regarded as a Bible, it's really revered this book, and in some other countries, much, much less so. The story goes that he, actually it was a compilation, what he did was interview lots of meditation masters, take what they had, I heard this, obviously second hand, I wasn't there, take what they gave him throughout what he didn't like, he himself was not much of a meditator, throughout what he didn't like, burnt what he threw out and kept the rest. I don't know if that's true, but I've heard that. Anyway, he, I think, if the history is right, he translates it in Abhidhamma, which is a kind of sort of technical, psychological bureaucracy of Theravadan Buddhism, also translates it as initial and sustained application. By the time of the Buddha, that's not how those words were used. There are okay translations, actually, to a certain extent. At a certain point in your practice, if you keep those translations, it should occur to you this doesn't really make sense, once you get into the other jhires. But it's okay, and at a certain point they stop kind of making much sense, but to a certain extent it's really okay. So initial application means bringing my mind to whatever it is, the breath, if I bring the mind, the initial application, sustained application, means in the sense I stay there and I probe it and I become intimate with it. So that's usually the explanation that's given on Vipassana retreats and on, I guess, quite a lot of Jhana retreats. One of my main teachers, Ajahn Jeff, translates them as directed thought and evaluative thought. It's a very different translation. And what he means really is attending to whatever the object is and thinking about it. So this is in the first Jhana, thinking about the breath, thinking about the energy body, thinking about the well-being or the pleasure. What would help right now? What would be helpful? How should I shift my emphasis? How should I view the breath? What way of looking should I play with? And relates the word vichara, the second of those terms, so dhamma to vichaya, which some of you will know the part, dhamma-vichaya is the second factor of the seven factors of awakening, the investigation. So there's a kind of investigative thinking about what's going on in the first Jhana. At least, I would say, at least sometimes. So we've got, for these two terms, we've got the possibility of the most popular translation and interpretation, initial and sustained application. The second one is just thinking, and the third one is directed and evaluative thinking, which really means this kind of creative, like, what's helping right now? How should I play with this? Which shall we choose? What are we going to do here? Do you want to know what I think? I think, forget about it. Forget about those terms anyway. Just throw them out. It doesn't make any... Of course you're going to be initial and sustained application. Of course you are. Just don't worry about it. If you're thinking about the meditation, great. And we've talked about that. If you're working with PT, great. It's fine. I think it's actually not that helpful. There's all this argument and tussle about it. And again, it's like, what's actually important here? I could say, at times, the first jhana can include thinking about how the meditation is going, what's helpful, etc. But thinking, it's not the kind of thinking, I suck at this. I bet everyone else in here is in the eighth jhana. I just should go home. Not that kind of thinking. If there's thinking, it's about what's happening. It's a very subtle, responsive, intelligent, connected thinking about the practice. Maybe, like people ask me as a jazz musician, do you think when you play, you're improvising, do you think? Well, yeah, but it's a different kind of thought. I'm not pondering long sentences. Or a painter really in the flow with their art. Are they thinking or not thinking? Well, there may well be a certain thought, certainly in part of the flow. We'll come back to this later when we talk about deep jhana, because one question we have is, what is a thought anyway? We'll come back to that. So I would, for what it's worth, my two cents on this is, forget about it. Just get into it. Just get into it, and this whole, what does that mean? We'll take care of itself. Just get into, in this case, get into the PT. Enjoy it. Get intimate with it as much as you can. The fullness of connection with it, spreading it, really opening to enjoying it, seeing how much you can enjoy it. If you just do that, don't worry about, is there thinking, or just get into it more, and it becomes a non-question what it really is. And then even in the second jhana, as you move to the second jhana, so one of the, in a way, factors of the second jhana is the dropping away of thinking. So it's a kind of a factor of an absence, if you like. But if I'm checking, am I thinking? Have there been any thoughts yet? Or if I'm measuring how long I've not been thinking or whether there's been thinking, or if I'm trying not to think, this, I would say, is not such intelligent practice for a number of reasons, one of which I've put, I'm putting my emphasis on the least significant factor, the least helpful factor of the second jhana, the least helpful factor of the second jhana. I'm going to come back to this, obviously, when we talk about the second jhana. So I think I've said already, I think, it seems from my experience teaching, that if you can get to the first jhana, I used to think, then actually all the jhanas are available to you, with a lot of work. So if you can get to the jhana, you can master, in the sense that I mean it, you can master all jhanas. It will take a long time and a lot of work and a lot of dedication, but it's possible if that's the sort of thing that you want. I actually would like to revise that, and I'd mention this, and actually say, if PT can arise, you can do all that. If PT can arise, there's no reason you can't attain the first jhana and then have all the jhanas. So actually the arising of PT should give you a lot of confidence. It's saying the road is clear, it's open, all you have to do is walk. Yeah, it might be hard at times, it's a long way. You're going to need a lot of ingenuity, you're going to need a lot of dedication, it's open. There's nothing in the way for you. That road is open. Who's heard another Pali word, nimitta? Oh, quite a lot. So, do you understand by nimitta something in the context of jhana practice, something like the appearance of a luminous visual form with some detail in it that you can then concentrate on that will take you into jhana? Yes? Okay. Again, the Buddha never used that word. He uses the word nimitta, but never, never, ever in that way. It comes from the Vasudimaga, etc. In English it's often translated as counterpart sign or it is in the old translations, I'm not even sure how it's translated now. In the Pali kana, meaning in the words of the Buddha, he does use that word, but more he uses it as object of perception. Any object of perception in meditation is a nimitta. Sometimes I think he uses it as, in a way it would translate as something like theme, theme of meditation, I think. In the Mahayana teachings, it's the same word in Sanskrit, nimitta, it has the additional meaning of ground or base, and that's connected with emptiness teachings and teachings about groundlessness, etc. So it had quite a different spin than in Mahayana teachings. Sign, though, is quite, we can use that word, so I don't mind using it, it's fine, I don't mind if you want to use it, but I would like to use it in a slightly different way, as sign. So that's usually the translated nimitta means sign. And it's, what is it? It's a sign that the samadhi is deepening, any sign that samadhi is deepening. So the arising of piti is a sign that samadhi is deepening. The arising of sukha, of happiness, is a sign that samadhi is deepening. The arising of a really kind of almost otherworldly, pristine, pure, luminous stillness is also a sign. The arising of the perception of space as a very clear perception is a sign at different levels that the samadhi is deepening. Some people get also, for instance, meditating, and then at some point it's almost like a white golden light is very common, like white golden, suffused light or kind of cloud of light in the mind. Sometimes some person's not sure, they're meditating, and then the sun just come out because everything's just got very bright. So this too, that white kind of light is also a sign that the samadhi is deepening. But the primary nimitta, again, the most important thing to put the attention on, and the most important thing around which the whole practice converges, in the first jhana the primary nimitta is the piti, if you want to use that word. The second jhana, the primary factor is the sukha, the happiness, we'll come back to that. So in the first jhana, in order to, piti has arisen through one way or another, however it has arisen, in order then to kind of consolidate it and move into an absorption in it, which is the first jhana, what do we need to, what needs to be there and what do we need to do? So these are some of the things I want to address. What kind of work, what kind of play? How strong does the piti have to be? I think I've touched on this already. There's a huge range in terms of the intensity of the piti that's possible, massive range. But it does need to be strong enough, it does need to be strong enough that it's definitely pleasurable. Before I can start working with it and trying to take that piti and kind of mold it, shape it, allow it to open and take me into the first jhana. It needs to be strong enough, which doesn't necessarily mean, you know, blow your head off. It also needs to sustain long enough. I think I said this yesterday, did I say that? Yes. So it needs to be around for let's say two or three minutes at least without going away. Two or three minutes, strong enough is definitely pleasant, then it's ready. Then I can decide to take that as my primary object and really get into it and work and play and there's the possibility that that moves into the first jhana. So I mentioned, I think I also mentioned this, it's good to review it though. In the first four jhanas, they're called rupa jhanas, which translate sometimes as form jhanas. Rupa has a few different meaning, but let's say form. What's happening as we go through one, two, three, four is the perception of the body becomes more and more subtle. So that the happiness of the second jhana, it might be a super intense happiness. It might be a happiness I've never experienced so much joy in my life. But it's still as an object, it's more refined than the pete. Pete is relatively speaking, gross, like it's a coarse object, like a coarse cloth compared to a really fine cloth. So that's not the same thing as intensity, do you get the difference? In the third jhana, the particular kind of peacefulness that arises in the third jhana is really very, very subtle. It's part of its beauty and it's more subtle than the happiness of the second jhana. And as you're pervading, saturating, surfacing, this is one way of saying what's happening is these primary factors, primary nimittas, the pete, the sukha, the, let's call it peacefulness for now, of the third jhana, the stillness of the fourth jhana. The body becomes them, they become the body. What's my body now? I don't have a sense of organs and solidity. So the usual solidity that we have of the body, hard bones and all that, and organs, etc., is more gross than the solidity, the refinement of the pete, which is more gross than the sense of solidity or refinement, if we can even call it solidity at that point of the happiness, which, do you get the sense? There's a spectrum here of increasing refinement or subtlety of the perception of the body. And because I've drenched a few saturated permeate, that my body has become pete, my body, breath, all that has become happiness, and there's a spectrum there of more refinement. When you get to the fifth jhana, any sense of form of body has disappeared and it's just space. In a way, that's ultra-refined, right? It's like nothing. Pete is important, actually, in many ways, and one of the things I want to emphasize is it's important to keep it around and keep our access to it and keep it as something that we consider lovely and consider as a resource, even when I'm working in my playground has become the seventh or eighth jhana or whatever. Sometimes what happens is we go into those formless jhanas when that's what you're working on, and then you want to come back and I want to skip back from the eighth to the third or something like that or the fourth. And the body vibration of stillness that's characteristic of the fourth or peacefulness that's characteristic of the third, I can't find it. The whole perception has become so ultra-refined from the deeper formless jhanas that I can't find what I need to find to enter the fourth or third jhana because I need to find that particular vibration, that particular bandwidth of refinement that is characteristic and prominent of the fourth or third jhana. So what can really help is actually just go all the way back to the pete, the first one, and get that going a bit, and then the third or fourth will be more accessible. Again, what I want to say today is not just about the first jhana, it's about working and playing in general, and so a lot of what I say will be relevant to whatever stage one is at will be relevant in years' time, etc. Sometimes it's possible that the pete in particular is an acquired taste. We're not actually sure how keen we are on it at first. So that's definitely possible, it's actually possible with any jhana. It can be we just fall in love with it right away and feel its loveliness, feel it as a resource, super excited about it. Or it might be that it's an acquired taste, so this could potentially be for any jhana. What's an interesting thing that happens, I'd say, with the majority of people is that when they start working on the third jhana, which is this very peaceful, exquisite sort of serenity, that's one of the main characteristics of it, then when you go back to the first jhana and the pete and all that, it feels so coarse and one becomes a bit of a snob. So I don't want anything to do with that. Because relatively speaking, it's actually quite gross relative to the third jhana. Still, I would say, in the context of the whole of jhana practice, we want to keep it. Again, I might have to re-find my enjoyment of it, I might have to re-feel it as enjoyable and pleasurable, it's an interesting thing. Sometimes, and this is actually quite common, if a person, if a practitioner has done a lot of insight meditation practice, the order in which they experience the jhanas is not one, two, three, four, etc. Mostly the way insight meditation practice is taught is, be mindful and things come up, watch them, let them go, watch them, let them go, watch them, let them go. In that being aware, being mindful and letting go, what am I cultivating there? I'm cultivating a kind of equanimity and so what happens in many, many insight meditation years of practice, retreats, etc. One has actually kind of developed a groove in the citta towards equanimity. Equanimity, maybe not a jhanic state of equanimity, but maybe some kind of... I need to explain something later on about different kinds of equanimity, we'll get to that another point. Basically equanimity is a common hanging out place for the mind that's done a lot of insight meditation. Then what happens, one goes on a jhana retreat and one wants to learn the jhanas, but what might happen is it just goes straight to, if not the fourth jhana, something akin to that or one of the form... one of some sort of a quasi-formless state, maybe where the senses are open because there are states that are like infinite space or infinite consciousness, but they're actually not those jhanas, the senses are still kind of... I'll explain the difference later, but there's something akin to the 4, 5, 6, for example. It's actually quite hard for that person to get pete because again, pete is too agitated and the mind has this groove to equanimity. They find themselves in some state that's maybe not the fourth jhana or whatever, but maybe near enough that actually, maybe... This is the sort of thing I usually work out in an interview with a person, maybe it's good if we start with the fourth jhana. We take that stillness that you've got and we really hone it and get it very consolidated, very bright, very powerful. And then master that and then go backwards. So the order of mastery doesn't happen one, two, three, four. I feel like I've said that very clumsily, but does that make sense? Yeah. So a lot of you have done a lot of insight practice as well. It's interesting. It's just something to be aware of. There can be this real almost habit towards equanimity and sometimes that habit can be both entrenched enough, but also powerful enough. In other words, that you keep finding yourself in a territory that's closer to the fourth. If my larger view is... Well, let's say something else. Sometimes a person skips the second jhana, which is characterized by a lot of happiness. And there may be all kinds of psychological reasons for that or the pete, you know, just a bit resistant to that. We touched on this yesterday in terms of the Arupa jhanas, the formless jhanas, again, doesn't necessarily go five, six, seven, eight. For me, if I remember back, I think the sixth one was easier than the fifth. And I kind of was trying to learn them both at the same time. And certain minds, depending on their inclinations and experience and trainings, will find different of the formless jhanas also easier than others. And maybe it's okay to... I don't think anyone will find the eighth jhana easier than others, but maybe it's okay to follow the order in which things open up for you. But I retain my vision of where are we going with this. So it's like, you know, imagine a sort of square, a check-off square for mastery of each of the eight jhanas. Can I really hang out and sustain? Can I marinate? Can I get it at will? Can I jump around from it? And you go, okay, eventually what I want is to look at that square for each of the eight jhanas and all those mastery skills and just have them all ticked. The order in which that ticking happens maybe doesn't matter so much. You understand? So it kind of depends. Now, I haven't so far heard that from anyone on the retreat, but I encounter it quite commonly as a teacher. The past tendency and experience in meditation, grooves in meditation, actually very much affect what opens up when and in what order. But we do want this differentiation. We really, really, it's so, so important. This is this and that's that. This is the second jhana and that's the third jhana. This is the first jhana and that's the second. This is piti and that's sukha, whatever it is. It's part of the cultivation, the development of sensitivity. Without that differentiation, as I said, something will kind of grind to a supi, squidgee halt at some point. It will be nice, but the possibility of really deepening insight will be limited. So each jhana to the next jhana is kind of like a quantum leap. It's kind of like I'm in a different realm now and mostly that's the experience. There's a quantum leap means it means there's nothing in between. Here's something and here's something and it's not that there's anything in between. I'm just here and then suddenly I'm here. Yeah, quantum leap. Mostly that's the experience. They're discrete quantumly differentiated states. But sometimes it will seem to you as much more of a spectrum. Like actually it is a continuum. Sometimes it will be experienced that way and we can also view it that way. But I would say it's really important to have this discrete sense of quantum leaps between states. Okay, one really large point which I mentioned I think in one of the first two talks. Rather than am I in or out of a jhana, can I just be thinking about jhana practice? It's quite a different shift. So that means for instance the hindrances are part of jhana practice. The place when I'm not sure whether I'm in or out, it doesn't really matter. The place where I said those terriers were sort of I can just hear them yapping. Maybe they do feel distant. They're on the edge of the consciousness. It's still jhana practice. And if I have that view it's going to be much, much more fruitful, much more intelligent. So I have this view of a big picture of jhana practice which includes a huge range of territory of experience. Not just these sharply defined so-called eight jhanas, but the whole territory. The gray areas, the I'm clearly in a hell realm now, the whatever. Even the way I walk around outside which I'll come to in between formal sittings, it's jhana practice. Because I'm walking around outside in a different way than I would if I was doing a Mahasi retreat, a Goenka retreat, if I was just hanging out, if I was on my way to work. So this is huge, actually this view. So what that means is there's work, as I said when I introduced the talk today, there's work or play, depending on your favorite word, in and out. On and off the cushion, but also in and out of a jhana. What's quite common the first time you enter what's a new jhana for you, let's say the first time you hit the first jhana or the second jhana or whatever, what's quite common is that it seems completely effortless. First maybe a few times in that new realm, you've made that quantum jump and it seems completely effortless. The idea of working there or doing something or playing with something seems just a million miles away. It certainly won't even occur to you if you haven't been told about it. But if you're really marinating, if you're just skipping through jhanas really fast, you won't notice this. You'll miss almost 99% of what's valuable about jhanas. You're just skipping right through and it's like I said, skipping, I've seen the Taj Mahal, I went there and I pointed my phone at it while I was looking at something else. If you hang out, if you really marinate, if you really start working and playing and bringing all your sensitivity and intelligence and awareness and openness and getting really intimate and getting to know them, after a few times at a new level that you've broken to, you start to realize, oh, there is work to do here or there is play to do. There's lots to do, but it's very, very subtle. We're talking about very subtle work play mostly. Yeah, definitely mostly. So if you still feel it's a completely effortless state where you can't do anything, it's actually that you're in some kind of unconsciousness and it's not going to be very helpful, it's not going to be very helpful in your life, etc. Then the work begins, okay, I've had my little holiday of this new level, and then the work and the play begins and I get used to this very, but what is it for the mind to really work in the most delicate ways, to really play in the most delicate ways, to learn about this genre, to consolidate it, to deepen it, etc., to learn about its different spaces, levels, textures, aspects. It can also be the case, and it commonly is the space case, that when consciousness reaches a new level, when the citta reaches a new level, it's a bit like a dam bursting. The first, again, the first experience, the first genre, the second genre, it's as if water has just, a dam has just broken apart and the water is just gushing through. It can be very, very intense. And then again, as I get used to that genre, it seems to get less intense, the experience, or it often can. So, what work, what play, what's involved there? The principle of moving between these modes of attention, the probing, the receiving, the wider, the narrower, etc., and that's part of the work. Again, it's quite subtle, but it's part of the work. There's something active in a genre. There are other modes of attention that's possible. You know, I could wrap the jhanic quality around the body and dissolve it in, or dissolve my body out. There's many things. Play. Find modes of attention that work. So, you know, creative. Even if I say savor, you know, whatever is the primary nimitta, the primary factor of that, like the PT in the first genre, to really relish it, to really savor it, actually involves a kind of active work. It's not just, if I really want to relish it to the max, I actually have to play with how I'm relating to it. So there's an acronym that some of you who've met over the years with me individually have heard. What do I need? When I'm in a genre, I need to know, what do I need to do now? As I said, at first it's, I don't do anything. I'm just there. It's going along. I'm going along on this momentum of the water through the burst dam. I'm not doing anything. I'm just like, wow, wow, wow, wow, wow. After a while, you see, oh, hold on, there is work to do, etc. What's the work that I have to do? What's important and what's not important? Because what's important tells me what work I have to do. What's not important, it's not part of the work that I have to do. So there's a, is acronym the right word when you have like initials for, yeah, sassy, sassy. S-A-S-S-I-E, S-A-S-S-I-E. So I'm not just sitting there. I'm doing something. Don't just sit there, do something. Isn't that the name of the book? No, it's the other way around. Don't just sit there, do something sometimes. Sometimes you can go into non-doing, but that's really in the larger context, just a mode. It's just a mode. So sassy, S-A-S-S-I-E. First S stands for suffusion, as the Buddha said, suffusing, saturating the whole body. So this is one of the things I'm working towards. Once the PT is there, I'm working towards make sure, or can I encourage, can I help the whole body space to be completely homogeneously suffused and saturated by the PT. At some point, it will be suffused and saturated. It's just done. Then that job is done. There's nothing more to do. It's done. What else am I going to do? It's suffused and saturated, right? So it's done. And we've talked about ways of playing with that and what to do when it doesn't quite work. The A, sassy, the second one, A. A for absorption. So sometimes, I don't know if you've had this experience, sometimes it's almost as if the PT can feel, or whatever it is, the happiness, whatever, can feel almost like in front of you a little bit. As you've got your chitta and body here somehow, and it's kind of in front, kind of, or something like that. We're aiming to, can I get more absorbed in it? Can I put myself and put the chitta kind of more inside it so I'm kind of really feel like I'm in something? Now to me, I would say that absorption, there's no limit to it. There's no limit to it. I want to say something else about the suffusion. Can I say that there and come back to the absorption? Is that okay? So when I'm trying to suffuse, I'm not looking, I'm not like looking, feeling around my body, which spaces are not, don't have PT. That was almost like turning your attention to the negative a little bit. It's more like just don't take it away from the PT and look at or obsess with what's wrong. Just let the PT spread, spread it out like you're spreading jam on toast or whatever, rather than attending to the negative. Remember how that subtle inclination of mind towards negativity, towards what's wrong, towards not quite good enough. So eventually, as I said, when we become more and more familiar with PT and more and more familiar with moving in and out of the first jhana, the PT will be spread every time. It's just normal. And eventually, when we're more and more familiar with it, with the PT, as I mentioned yesterday, and I put a lot of emphasis on this, we can start, if we want sometimes, to see pain, to play with perception, so we see pain as PT. That painful area in the body, I see it as PT and it's therefore pleasurable. You can do that all the way through the jhanas. So I could see the same painful spot as happiness or stillness or nothingness or whatever. Again, I don't think the eighth jhana, but... Now, it's not, when I say that, what's the point of that? It's not like, oh, that's a pretty handy thing, that can come in useful if you're uncomfortable on a long bus ride or whatever it is. Yes, it might, but that's not really the point. And it's certainly not the point to try and... Oh, now I can do that, then I can live a pain-free life. That's not the point either. The Buddha had plenty of pain. I have plenty of pain. That's not the point. The point is it's telling me something about the malleability of perception. It's telling me something about the dependence of appearances and experiences on the way of looking. Dependent on the way of looking, there's this experience, dependent on another way of looking, there's a different appearance, a different experience. And when I understand the emptiness of all things, in other words, that all appearances, all experiences do depend on the way of looking, when I really understand that, it empowers, or rather it tells me about, that means that perception's a malleable, and it empowers my ability to be malleable with perception. So I said, I think it was yesterday, I said, this is the most significant thing. This is the most significant thing in the Dharma. This is the most significant thing, or it's more significant, I think I said, it's more significant than, is this a correct Jhana? Am I in or out of that Jhana? I said that, yeah. It's the most significant thing, but it's not our primary emphasis or intention on this retreat. So as a practice modality, it's secondary. In other words, just play with that a little bit once you're familiar with PT and another Jhana factor. It doesn't become like the main practice. So philosophically, and in terms of its implications for our life, and our understanding, our liberation, it's the most significant thing. In the context of Jhana retreat, it's a secondary practice, just something you can play with now and then. Do you understand the difference? OK, so back to the absorption thing. Can it be the case that we can be so absorbed that we don't hear sounds, for instance, you don't hear the birds chirp or sing or whatever it is, and the sense doors close. Again, the Pali Canon, the Buddha doesn't describe the first four Jhanas that way. The Vasudimaga does, I think. Sometimes in the Pali Canon, the Buddha says that happens in the formless Jhanas, in Jhanas 5-8, but other passages, the Buddha doesn't say that. He describes them with senses, the senses still open. So obviously, the Vasudimaga is an improvement over what the Buddha said. Right? Well, hold on. Make sure you don't have a notion of heresy, or do you have a notion of heresy, because some people approach Dharma as axiomatically from the beginning, whatever the Buddha said is true and right and the authority. So actually, probably, I don't know how much percentage of Buddhists approach Buddhism that way. So how are you doing with that one? Is it possible that someone who lived after the Buddha could improve on the Buddha's teaching? What's that? I would say exactly the same thing. But I really mean that as a question, an actual question. How do you think it's not possible? Why? Why is it not possible? How are you thinking about the whole thing that something like that becomes not possible? In every other field of human endeavor, there's the possibility of improving on what went... So Einstein improved on Newton, who improved on Copernicus. At the moment, there's maybe something wrong with Einstein's theory. We're going to need to improve on that pretty soon. So that's just an interesting... I'm not going to go into... I've talked about it in other situations. But if we say... Either you just have the Buddhas right and then it's not a question. How do we decide about... Do the senses close? Do I hear the birds or do I not hear the birds? So if you decide the Buddha's right, you hear the birds. If you decide it's possible that someone could improve on the Buddha, then it's a bit more open. If you ask me, did anyone in the history of Buddhism improve on the Buddha, or on certain aspects of the Buddha's teaching, I would say, yeah, I think Nagarjuna did. I think he took what the Buddha kind of said kind of a little bit, but didn't expand on too fully. You know, the Kachayana, so to turn the middle way between existence and non-existence. It's all... To me, it's all there in the Pali Canon. And Nagarjuna took it and really expanded it and worked it and took its implications. And to me, really, there's an improvement. I'm not thrusting this on anyone, but just if you ask me, how are we going to decide about this one? Is the Vasudimaga saying your senses close, you can't hear the birds? Is that an improvement or not an improvement? I mean, certainly we're talking about better absorption, right? More intense absorption because you can't hear anything. Must be better, right? More, it's more, more is better. Sorry. Again, I'd like us to use our intelligence. If we're going to say it's better, why is it better? Why is it better that more absorption is better? And that will connect, again, back to what I was talking about at the beginning. How am I thinking? How am I conceiving of the whole jhanas? How am I conceiving of awakening? And how am I conceiving of the jhanas in their place to awakening? So why is it that more absorption would be better? You have to kind of explain the whole, what are we doing? Where are we going? What are we doing with jhanas? You can. There's conceptions that, again, conceive of jhanas as like, yeah, it must be like, if I really get this laser beam attention, then that's better because insight arises from a laser beam attention that can dissect momentary reality into that super fast momentary passing and arising of the aggregates, and that's ultimate reality. And I've seen that through my laser beam attention. If I think that's the ultimate insight, I've been through all this. I'm not going to repeat it, but is more better? What is the fruit of that more absorption? And again, it's, again, can turn things around. Hang out with people who have that degree of absorption or who say they have or whatever. Hang out with them. Learn about how they are, how their life is, how their insight is. Talk to them about deep insight things. Does it bear fruit? Or what fruit does it bear? So absorption, I would say it's infinite. However absorbed we are, again, the question here is, what work, what am I trying to do in practice in this moment, in this jhana, or with this petey? What am I trying to do? I'm trying to get more absorbed, but I can never reach the end of that. Someone says, oh, I didn't hear the birds, and another person says, oh, well, someone was sawing off my neck with a chainsaw, and I didn't feel anything. It's like, okay, that person's better than that, but it doesn't matter. What's the fruit? But basically, in terms of work and play, it gives us a direction. And however absorbed I am, I can be more. But I don't need to worry so much about it. It's just a little bit more. It's like, do I have it, do I not have it? Is it, jhana, because I can still hear the birds? It's not that question. It's just, it gives you a direction that's open-ended. And that, in a way, takes the pressure off. And it avoids this whole question of do I have it, do I not have it? Do you understand? So the work with that one, when you're suffused in the first S, it's just done. I've done it. Okay, I don't have to bother about it. With this one, it's just a constant kind of part of the creative working and playing. Is it possible to get more inside it? Is it possible to get really, really into it? And it's open, but so it's a direction that invites subtle work and play, but it's not something I'm going to fret about. One day, it might be better than the other. This doesn't matter. Okay, S, A, two S's in the middle of sassie, sustaining, sustaining the PT, or in the case of the first jhana, or whatever is the primary nimitta of whatever jhana you're working in, and sustaining the attention on that. These two as well, I would say they're infinite, infinite in their possibilities. So however much we sustain, we can always increase the sustaining. And if you look closely enough, and I don't want you to do this at the moment, if you look closely enough, you can see that there's micro nanoseconds, even if you're so sustained, the attention is so, so sustained, you just have to look at it in a certain way and see that there's micro nanoseconds where it wasn't. But don't do that, and I'll explain why at the end. But it's a direction. I'm working towards, okay, this is right now what I need to work on, really sustaining, really keeping the mind on this subtle object, on this refined object. Or if it feels like there's gaps in the PT. Again, if I, or the happiness or whatever, if I look at it closely enough, I will see gaps. So again, it's not something, it's something to bring a little more discernment, intelligence to. And it's just, however sustained those things are, they can be more sustained. So I'm working, they're a direction of work, a direction of play, as opposed to an achievement thing and a definition thing. I define it was, it wasn't the jhana because it was all going great, and then I heard one bird chirp. So at that second there, I was out of the jhana, and then the next second I was back in. It's all just, it's not that helpful to think that way, just work on more sustaining. SASSI, the I is for intensity. So in this case, if we're talking about the first jhana, it's the intensity of PT. And I would say that actually doesn't matter. So again, the very common tendency would be like, well, it must be better if it's more intense, right? No, it actually doesn't matter. It has to be strong enough that it's pleasant. And that's it. The intensity will vary over time. You will notice, you will also notice if you play with certain things, sometimes there's things you can do that build the intensity. Over time with the first jhana, like, I mean, you know, a lot of time in and out of first jhana, a lot of marinating, a lot of experience and skill developing with it, the intensity will actually get less intense. It's like that mountain river that I was talking about. That's the direction of maturation, not more and more intensity. So there's a certain way that the intensity of the first jhana, A, doesn't matter, and B will anyway in its own time get less intense. S-A-S-S-I-E is for enjoy, which sometimes I find myself having to say to people, it's almost like you want to meditate with a flashing neon sign that says enjoy, enjoy, enjoy, enjoy, enjoy. Sometimes it's almost like you say, you know, it may be that if you just really seek to maximize enjoyment in the moment over and over with whatever ingenuity and creativity and play you want, that that will basically take you where you want to go, and whatever needs to happen will happen just from the intention to maximize enjoyment. It's very different from is this it, is this not it, am I doing it right, etc. But how many times have I heard from retreatants practicing jhana how difficult it is to allow oneself to really enjoy, to fully enjoy, and how so often we notice there's something holding back or something blocking or preventing, and sometimes it's a verbal, we actually say, this can't be right, this can't be, I don't know what they're teaching here, but it's not proper, it's not proper dharma or whatever it is. Sometimes, or more often, it's actually more an energetic thing, we actually just feel ourselves holding back or preventing or, and then doubt comes, is this really okay, etc. Sometimes it's because of one's past, maybe particular kinds of religious upbringings that kind of stress that anything spiritual or religious can't have enjoyment, have anything to do with it. Sometimes it might be our dharma background, our Buddhist dharma background that has again encouraged a sort of snobbishness around enjoyment, again, all because of a certain certain views around what we're going, and then certain views that get kind of entrenched in terms of persona and all the rest of it. So what, this is so common, this is really really common, what needs to happen with this, sometimes a person needs to actually inquire with themself or with a friend or with a teacher or whatever, actually what are the views and what am I believing here, and what's actually at the root of this psychology, this belief. Perhaps more often though, it just gets fixed without a big psychological process, it just gets fixed moment to moment. Okay, I notice I'm a little bit holding back the last e of sassy, can I just enjoy it? What would, can I just, this moment, can I just find, can I just really savor it and relish it, can I just really open to it? So you're just moment to moment encouraging the enjoyment, and that is changing that psychological habit patterns, deeply entrenched psychological habit patterns around enjoyment, around spirituality, etc. So more often I've noticed it can be healed, that pattern, that holding, that prevention can be healed just by moment to moment, again and again. I don't have to have a big psychological process about it, but sometimes some people do, it's really helpful to inquire into that. So the work, the play, you know, it's very labile, it's very responsive, it's very agile. What is the work play right now? What do I need to do right now? And sometimes it is enjoy what you have, enjoy what you have, maximize the enjoyment. Again, how powerful that, it's not quite good enough, it's not as good as it was yesterday, it's not as, etc. And that micro tendency of the psychology of the view to poo-poo what we have, or to find fault, to look actually what happens is, of everything we could pay attention to, something nice is going on, something that could be better, something that could be better. It's an inclination of attention even more than it is of actual thought. No, this really isn't that good, that's quite a gross level. Sometimes it's just where the attention goes, I'm fussing over what's not quite right. So if I just enjoy what you have, enjoy the good thing, sometimes that's the emphasis that needs to be there. So, there's such a great gift in terms of re-educating, reprogramming the psyche, over and over, over these micro moments bring psychological change. And other times, you know, it's pleasant, it's nice, it's good, it's going well, the mind is definitely stable, good feeling, whatever it is, PT, sukka, whatever, but there's just a slight, very, very slight dullness. So what's happening, not falling asleep or anything, it's just, it could be, one needs to actually bring more presence, talking very subtle, bring more aliveness, bring more alertness. One needs to actually exercise more experimentation and play rather than just sit there and it's okay, it's good. It's fine. Probe more, whatever it is, play with that intensity up and down, play with the modes of intention, etc. So sometimes, something's pleasant, oh, that's good, but actually what we need to do, for example, is, now can I really ramp up the intensity of the attention in this moment and really penetrate that? So often, as I said, this business of intensity of attention, many people are not, because you don't get taught that in school, so we need to familiarize ourselves, what is it in this moment, what does it feel like and how do I do it, turn the intensity up, for example. But that will take me, in some moments, to another level. Other times, it will be more just the receptivity. Other times, it will be don't fuss with trying to make it better, just enjoy it. So what we need to do at any moment is a constantly shifting, shifting ground, kaleidoscope, etc. What's quite common, I mentioned this, for instance, this experience of light, of white light or golden light, that's pretty common. I call that a secondary nimitta, it's a secondary sign that the Samadhi is deepening. The primary one, again, if we're talking about the first John, the primary one is the PT. So what can happen is the bright light starts to get very interesting and the PT is there as well. So this is quite important. Can I blend them? Because the light is good and it's helpful and it's a sign, but can I mix them? So they're almost like, they're just two aspects of the same thing, so they're two sets of the same thing. So that if I'm kind of probing, if I'm probing the PT, it's the same as probing the light. I have the experience that probing the PT is probing the light and if I'm probing the light, because I can probe the light as something that will take me deeper into the PT. In other words, they're just, they're aspects of the same phenomenon. If I can't blend them, then I have to be really sure what's primary and what's secondary and the light is secondary. Just leave it, it's fine. It's fine, it's a good sign, but it's not the primary thing. The primary thing is the PT and that's what I'm trying to really get into. But oftentimes it is possible to, do you understand what I mean, mix them together? It's almost like visually entering the light is the same thing as entering the PT, for example. We're doing okay? They're both referring to steadiness. One is steadiness of the attention and one is steadiness of the primary nimitus, the steadiness of the PT. In other words, it doesn't go away for a second or whatever and come back, or if it's a second genre, it's the happiness or whatever. So two kinds of sustaining. We could stop there or I could try and finish today because I'm not sure I'm going to, I could be able to come in tomorrow. Is it too much or should I just push on for now? All right, we use this term mastery and all this is part of developing mastery. Mastery is not about measuring the self and kind of getting brownie points and ego stuff. It's about working with the jhanas in a way that they're going to really be most fruitful. So what happens? Here I am meditating, now I've gotten into the first jhana and it's trundling on very nicely and then something happens. I've just been thrown out of that realm. I'm not even sure what happened. I've just been ejected. Or it kind of was our beginning. It feels like it's losing power a little bit and then it's gone. So after, well actually you can try this from the beginning once you feel like, okay, this must be the territory of the first jhana sort of. When that happens, when you lose it, see if you can just remember it. Just remember back the first jhana or whatever it is. So just see if you can do that. It was a recent experience. It was alive. Just remember it back. Just summon it back. It's a very delicate light movement. Of course, sometimes you won't be able to and you'll have to go back to your base or spring ball practice or if you're in another jhana you might find a jhana lower down or whatever. Towards the end of a sitting, so these are all things you can try. Towards the end of a sitting, if you're not completely out of energy, you could practice just a couple of minutes or whatever, two or three minutes, five minutes. You could practice deliberately going from, let's say you were in the first jhana or thereabouts, you deliberately go from there to a kind of more normal consciousness. You just drop, you could just come out of it deliberately. Spend some time there, a few moments, a few whatever, and then see if you can come back to the first jhana. Just jump straight back into the first jhana. So you're more deliberately jumping. All this, all this what I'm going to give you ideas to try, it's all very light. It's just fun and games. It's just play. I mean it is part of mastery, but you have to have a very light attitude to it. You're just playing with perception basically, playing with consciousness, playing with realms. Now we talked about walking meditation instructions, right? So should I just briefly go through that again? If you can, should I? So again, all this applies to where is my learning edge playground. So let's say I'm now getting used to the first jhana. I've been in and out and it's super exciting and I'm into it. So when I go to the walking period, I stand at one end of my walking path and I just see. Can I remember back, actually, let's say this. Can I go to the energy body, remember back the first jhana? And I just stand there, maybe PT comes, and I just stand and get into the PT and work with it, suffuse it, etc., the same deal. And I stand there as long as it takes or as long as I want to. So I could spend the whole walking period just standing there and it becomes a standing period. It's fine. Or after some minutes when I feel like, okay, there's the PT and I'm kind of really, yeah, it's really yummy. I'm really into it, whole body, everything. Then I can begin to walk. The question is, can I keep that focus? Can I keep the primacy of the PT around as I'm walking? And how fast do I have to walk to do that? So the interesting thing is I might need to walk really fast, or I might need to walk really slow, or I might need to walk, so I have to be really responsive to find what is the pace. All of this is responsive, sensitive and responsive. And I can stop anywhere on the path and get into the PT again, go to the end, take my time, however long I want. Basically I'm walking up and down in the PT and focusing on the PT in that bubble and enjoying an opening and probing that bubble, yeah? That's basic walking instructions. We can come back to that. Now some of this, what I'm going to put out now, actually, kind of you have to be a little careful with the pacing of when you try it. But after you've had enough experience or familiarity with the first Jhana and the PT, then let's say you're in the lunch queue, and it's not your turn to dole the food on your plate, but you're in the lunch queue, and can I be there in the lunch queue and just remember back the PT and maybe even the whole Jhana state? And maybe you get it back and then can I get into it for 30 seconds, a minute, and if it's a really slow lunch queue you can, however, you know, long. Or you're having a cup of tea in the lounge or the library, and just let me see, can I find the PT? Is it there? Can I summon it? Can I remember it and then get into it? Or you're walking down the corridor here. Let's just see, I walk down the corridor, let's see if I can walk down the corridor in the PT. I'm just remembering or summoning it, very, very light. Or you're sitting on the toilet, or you're lying down in bed before, whatever. So what you're really doing is deliberately remembering the state, deliberately remembering the perception actually, and the subtlest of intentions, the subtlest of intentions to recall it. So you have to have enough familiarity with the PT and the Jhana to begin to try this. You don't want to try it too early because it would just be a bit frustrating. Sometimes a little whisper, a silent whisper in the mind, for instance, rapture, which is one of the translations of PT or bliss or whatever, or PT if you want parley, just like a grain of something into the chitta and it does its magic. The mind, as samadhi gets deeper and deeper, the mind becomes more and more suggestive. Very, very subtle suggestions actually work their magical power. But all this needs enough familiarity, because you don't want to try it too early, it will put too much pressure on. The sort of thing that in one-to-one interviews I might wait till I suggest this to a person. You get the sense, and sometimes I find myself more aware that it's available, it's almost like you can feel it in them, but the person hasn't realized that it's just available yet. So why don't you try this? Eventually you can begin, like I described in the walking period, actually you can begin your sittings that way. You can begin with PT, begin with the first jhana, or if the third jhana is your learning edge play, you begin with the third jhana. This very, very subtle intention. Now of course, sometimes while you're still working on that, sometimes you're going to try it and you know, okay, rapture. Okay, rapture. Come on now. Five, ten minutes max. If it's not igniting, it's not igniting, fine, back to the base practice. But in time, this becomes more than anything else, the way you get into jhana. You just remember it. You just have this subtlest of intention. So this as I said is part of the elements of mastery. We have to be careful with energy here, because one of the functions of the base practice, or the spring ball practice, is actually that it gives energy, you build energy through it. So if you just start right away with the PT, sometimes it will go for a little while, but the whole sitting will be sooner in the sitting when you kind of run out of it, sometimes. Other times not. So it's a bit, the analogy I use sometimes is like a long jumper, needs a run-up. But again, it's one of those analogies that really doesn't work when you think about it. Because there are some long jumpers that don't need run-ups sometimes. Okay, I'll rework that one. But the base practice functions sometimes. In other words, sometimes we might find the PT right, great, but then 15 minutes later it's all just dissipated. We didn't have enough energy built up from the base practice. But it's still worth playing with. At that point, okay, go back to the base practice, it doesn't matter. What's more important here is the malleability. So when you get to that point, and again, don't hurry all this. Some people it's like, they're hearing all this and they want to try it immediately and it's too soon. Other people, I couldn't possibly do that, that sounds completely advanced and outlandish, and actually they're ready for it. So talk with us about it, try a little bit, it's all very light, but probably wait for these things. And at first, not every time, just occasionally try, okay, I'm going to my sitting now and let's see if I can get it just by subtle intention, but not every time. Eventually it's possible. Okay, then I'm sitting and it's all going really well. What do I do? What do I do then? I sit and I sit more and I sit more. I basically sit as long as it's good. And good means as long primarily as good as this jhana is good, marinate. So yes, there's a place for moving quickly between jhanas, but that's got a very minor place. Much more we want to marinate, sit as long as this jhana is sustainable and feels good. So this marination business is so important, you know. We want to work towards like, so, you know, let's say a minimum, minimum I'm able to sit in really nice PT, really pretty absorbed for an hour. Let's just throw something like that out for a minimum if I don't have to go to my work job or whatever it is. If I'm, you know, zipping through 1 to 8, let's say, I can just zip through 1 to 8 and then I come back down 8 to 1 and that's my practice and I practice the jhanas. My question is, is that making much difference to your life? Really honestly ask yourself, is that making much difference? What difference is it making? How much difference? And if it's not, why are you practicing that way? Why would I keep doing that? Maybe someone's taught me that way, maybe that's my understanding of the text or whatever, but why? The point of all this is to make a difference, a real profound, liberating, beautiful difference, a whole depth of resource and all the other stuff we talked about. So the marination is what's going to, one of the primary things that will really make the difference. So I'm sitting as long as I can with my, within my playground, let's say that's the PT of the first jhana, and then at some point I start to run out of batteries, the whole thing, my energy goes a little bit. So either the PT begins to subside, mind starts to get a bit more distracted, or areas of the body start to get uncomfortable, pain or whatever. Is it possible to resurrect it? So I've run out of batteries, but sometimes it's almost like you get a little emergency supply somewhere that you can tap into, and I just resurrect the PT, find a way, and it comes back for some minutes, perhaps. Maybe, you know, this is all very variable, maybe you get a couple of shots at sort of an extra five or ten minutes just by resurrecting it, so just the fact that it disappeared doesn't mean you can't somehow find a way to get it back. Maybe that involves going back to your base or springboard practice, etc. But at a certain point it's like, okay, there's no more juice in the tank, it's not going to come back. Then, time to do something different. Either you get up, you do walking meditation, standing meditation, or you just go and have a cup of tea. Go and relax, rest the chitta, appreciate, look at the beauty outside, put the mind in that restful open light gratitude. Maybe it's time for your yoga practice or whatever it is. Maybe you go for a walk, but there will be times in this kind of practice where you need to rest. You just need to rest if we're doing it this way. Sit, walk, sit, walk, sit, walk. You actually need to rest and recharge. So, again, you have to be a little careful about the pacing of when you begin to try this stuff, but eventually, as I mentioned, part of mastery is that you can go for a walk, not just walking meditation, but you can go for a walk in your bubble of PT and giving that the primary attention, or you can go for a walk in your bubble of peacefulness of the third jhana or stillness of the fourth jhana, whatever. Your primary focus is on that quality, that primary quality, stillness, peacefulness, PT, whatever it is, and you're really enjoying it, and you're not really having to worry about where the feet place themselves, etc. So, again, when is it time to introduce trying to play with this? You can talk to us and find out, or just try it. You don't want to put too much pressure, and you have to be a little careful with the pacing here, but at first, it's all just games. So, okay, let's see if I can walk from here to that tree over there in PT, and maybe it's 50 yards or whatever. It doesn't matter. I mean, gradually, you can extend that, but this is part of the fun, part of the playing, and part of the mastery. No pressure, very light. It's really just playfulness. Let's say you're sitting, and it's time to come out the jhana, and now the lunch bell goes, and it's like, if you're into it, it's like, who cares about lunch? And that's a very healthy response, and then it's something you remember, oh, I have the lunch wash up to do, so I need my lunch. So, then, okay, I need to end. And coming out, so sometimes, at first, coming out of a jhana, you need to do it quite slowly, because it's really quite an altered state, and so if you just open your eyes and jump up, it might be a bit disorienting, jarring. So, when you're new to certain states, I would suggest coming out quite gradually. But secondly, as part of that, sometimes, why don't you see if it's possible to kind of keep the jhana quality around? Keep a connection with that, and have that even be the primary focus. So, okay, I'm going now to lunch or whatever it is, and I'm sitting, open the eyes. As I open the eyes, I'm still really in touch with the PT, if we're talking about the first jhana, whatever it is. As I get up, still, as I move out, maybe as I move out, I begin to lose it, so I just stop a little bit, see if I can get it back, and move it again. Again, it's all playfulness. I'll say this again, but when we get to the higher jhana, you don't need to come out in sequence. So, right now, we're talking about the first jhana. Let's say you're working on the third jhana. When you come out, you don't need to go, okay, 2-1, 3-2-1. You don't need to do it, just as you don't need to go 1-2-3 to get into the third jhana. So, sometimes, you can do that just because that's the game you've decided to play that day. You could do 3-1-2 and then come out, or whatever, or 3-0, or whatever, but you certainly don't need to do that. Okay, a couple of things, in a way, implicit in what I've said, but it's so important. A couple of things about effort, patience and perseverance. The more you do this, the more you realize that the state of the chitta and the perception, there can be quantum jumps in a split second in this kind of practice. Often, unexpectedly, nothing's really happening, nothing's really happening. Suddenly, there's an opening. If I'm getting dejected and despondent when nothing is happening, and I'm getting impatient, and I'm kind of giving up the alertness and refinement of my antennae, that very attitude will prevent these quantum jumps happening, because I've turned something off. But if you can keep them alive, in other words, don't get sucked into impatience, don't get sucked into a view of, oh, this is terrible, or whatever, then your antennae is there, and it's really quite remarkable how quickly things can shift. There's just a quantum leap, and suddenly a door is there, and you can go through it. So that's part patience and perseverance, because that kind of thing is possible. But patience and perseverance with playfulness, really, really important. Meaning, do I need to be a bit more active here? Do I need to kind of bump up the sense of presence, the aliveness? Do I need to make sure my antennae are attentive to subtleties? Do I need to try different things? Do I need to play with the subtle effort levels a bit more, a bit less? So patience and perseverance, but with playfulness. And always this question, what needs emphasizing, what needs prioritizing right now? Right now in this moment, what needs emphasizing, what needs prioritizing? Is it in this moment, or for this little stretch of time, that the concentration, the stability of attention is what needs on the object, on the breath, or the primary nimiter, the PT, or whatever, is that what needs the emphasis right now, the priority? Or is it the subtlety of attention that needs the emphasis and the priority now? Or is it the surrendering? Or is it the spreading? Or is it the maximizing of the enjoyment moment? These are all different emphases. Now for this little stretch in this practice period, that's what I'm emphasizing, or that's what needs emphasizing. This is what I mean by a kind of playfulness, agility, responsiveness, willingness. Okay, some of you might have heard the instruction to review Ajana after you're out. Have anyone heard that before? A couple of people, yeah. So this a little bit gets interpreted in different ways, but I'd say one of the things is, one of the questions to ask is, was there anything new that I learned there? Was there anything new for me? Anything helpful that I learned? In other words, there something happened that felt like it was an opening, an improvement, a deepening, or whatever in some way. Was there anything different that I did, perhaps? Anything at all. And just to remember it at that point before you get up, and try it again. It might have been a coincidence, it might not have been that thing, but it might be, yes, it was that thing that you did, or did differently, or a different waiting, or emphasis, or whatever. In the larger scale of things, you might want to check, am I neglecting the first and second Jhana, for instance? So it's more of a macroscopic checking, reviewing. Sometimes what you often hear is, part of the reviewing of a Jhana after a Jhana is to review the fact of its impermanence. So lest you mistake a Jhana for a permanent thing. I find that a little puzzling, because it's completely obvious, or it should be completely obvious that it's impermanent. It should be completely obvious, or it becomes much more obvious with time, that it's also not an achievement of the self. A Jhana is dependent on certain causes and conditions coming together. And the more you practice, the more that should become glaringly obvious. There's actually very little danger to get attached to expecting a Jhana to be permanent, and also very little danger to the self getting grandiose, I think. So it's dependent on causes and conditions. A Jhana is also, so it's definitely impermanent, it's dependent on causing, but it's also empty. In terms of its, the deeper levels of its emptiness, don't do that yet. Don't contemplate its emptiness yet, even some of you quite know what that means, but if you're familiar with emptiness practice, leave that aside. It's something we'll come back to later as an option. And that's not part of reviewing a Jhana. And also, it's microscopic impermanence. Don't do that either. That will not be helpful at this point. We don't want to deconstruct Jhanas too soon. We want to let them construct. Deconstructing Jhana too soon is really like throwing the baby out with the bathwater. I've actually missed the point. We can always deconstruct later. What we want is actually to consolidate, to see it and experience it as something continuous and homogenous, not impermanent with lots of holes in it, and not full of its opposite, etc. Okay, last thing. Outside of formal practice, and perhaps when you're doing your work job, or you're just having a shower or whatever you're doing, there are times when the chitta needs to rest. You need to not put too much pressure on it. But there's a spectrum there, because still you can have quite a kind of light contact or light presence, light sense of the presence of the primary Jhana factor, the PT, or whatever. But the whole flavor of that can be, so either you can completely rest, just let the whole thing go, or you can be like, I'm moving down the corridor really in this PT, or going for a walk in this PT. Or you can just be moving around with just a light sense of the flavor of the primary Jhana factor, whether it's PT or Sukha, or whatever it is. Generally speaking, the whole sort of tone and tenor of the practice outside of sitting should be really quite light, really quite easy, open. Just this light mindfulness, open, light, easy. That's the vibe of things. We also, outside of formal sittings, and again, remember all this is Jhana practice, all of it. We also want to be vigilant to the coming and going of the hindrances. And not take them personally, if that's possible, and not believe them. But we're aware, because they come and they're like poison darts. The hindrance comes and it spreads its poison into the chitta, and then it starts coloring the view of the self, it starts coloring the view of other people, it starts coloring the view of the perception, the view of the retreat. So hindrances are like poison darts. We need to be really quite aware when they're around, not believe them, not take them personally. Okay, so that's good. I got through, we got through what I was intending, so that, what that means for tomorrow is I may well be in, or depending on what happens, I may not be in, but at least we've done that.

 Ok, Okie doke. So what I want to talk about now is PT. PT. And probably won't quite finish it with it today, but I want to get quite a lot of material done. Broadly speaking, we could say there are two approaches or two avenues by which a practitioner works, plays, so that eventually PT arises. But these two are not, they're not so black and white. The distinction between them is not so black and white, and neither are they mutually exclusive, like I'm only doing this or only doing that. But a person usually has predominantly one way or predominantly another. So one is working with the energy body and finding and encouraging any sense of well-being in the energy body space. And as I said, coaxing it, tending to it, if it's an ember and I'm trying to get a campfire going, what do I need to do to get this ember, what do I need to put around it, do I need to blow on it, do I need to shelter it from the wind, whatever it is, what do I need to do to get this ember to turn into a fire, a campfire. So in a way what we're starting with is the energy body experience and any which way I can get that experience and massage it, support it, shape it, encourage it, ignite it to move towards more and more pleasantness until there's PT basically. The second way is to choose something, choose an object and just concentrate repeatedly on that object. And if the concentration gets more steady and the energy accumulates there etc., then at some point PT evolves in the experience in the energy body. So broadly speaking there's two ways. What is PT? I think we already said something about that, so I define it, I'll repeat anyway, PT is, I define it as pleasant feeling that's felt physically, whose origins is non-sensual. That's just how I define it. And so for a meditator this can come up in all kinds of ways, there's all kinds of flavors and manifestations of PT. So we talked about the whole body can feel like it's tingling or parts of the body can feel like tingling, it can feel like, it can actually feel like, some people say it feels just like an orgasm, it can feel like an orgasm, it can feel like something much more subtle like a kind of pleasant warmth or a pleasant lightness as if one's almost floating, it can feel like waves of sort of pleasant bliss or rapture or ecstasy going through the body. There's many many manifestations it can have. One of the interesting things about how PT manifests is that it evolves over time and evolves in a couple of ways. One way is, I might have already mentioned this, is that as you get into let's say the third Jhana, then the experience of the repeated experience of the third Jhana affects the way PT comes up for you from then on. The third Jhana is very peaceful, very incredibly beautifully serene and tranquil and it's almost like that does something to the whole energy body or it does something to the whole chitta or something and thereafter usually a person's PT is much calmer than it might have been in the beginning. So there's a kind of retroactive effect that deeper Jhanas can have on the experience of the first Jhana which is characterized by PT. Does that make sense? So that's one way. What can also happen, and it's very individual, what can also happen is one's meditating, for instance let's say one's doing this, I'm going with the concentration thing and I'm concentrating on the upper lip tip of my nose and concentrating concentrating and then I notice at times concentration seems to develop and I notice at times these kind of almost like a lightning bolt through the body of extreme pleasure but it's gone, it's gone in two seconds or a second or something or it might be like a wave of bliss or ecstasy or just a wave of pleasant feeling kind of washing over through the body but again it's gone in a couple of seconds, two or three seconds. This is in a way, it's good, it's PT, it's definitely PT, it's great, things are happening, wonderful. When that happens open to it, enjoy it. If you're still really working with the object, you're not ready to leave the main object then. So you still stay with again if I follow my example, it's breath, you're still, this is in my background awareness, I'm certainly opening to it and enjoying it but I'm not kind of then going oh, let's focus on that, it's not ready yet, it's not steady enough, it's just a passing thing. What we want and what might happen from the beginning or might happen more with time, what we want is a more steady PT, something that's around for let's say at least two or three minutes without disappearing. Once it's got steady and once it's, and if you're sure this is definitely pleasant, then you're ready to work with it and I'll talk about in a couple, I'll begin to talk in this talk how to work with it a bit more from adding on from yesterday. So we need to wait till it's relatively steady, right, in temporarily steady. We want it to be steady but actually just to be really clear, we want PT and Sukkah. So I remember, I don't know how many times but certainly two or three or more, over the years in interviews here, someone has come in and in the course of whatever we were talking about over their retreat, reported that they were practicing usually in Asia somewhere or something and had experienced PT and had experienced Sukkah, it's a word I'll introduce, it means happiness from meditation, PT and Sukkah or PT or Sukkah and reported it to the, in the interview and were asked if it was pleasant and they enjoyed it and they said yes and then were actually shamed for having it. The teacher, what they told me was actually quite severe and somehow they felt shamed and they felt years later often quite hurt and quite traumatized by that interaction, by that and something in their practice and also their whole relationship with practice had gotten quite twisted because of that. There was often, it might be quite surprising, often quite a lot of grief with that. Something that had touched the being quite deeply, that they were open about, was a lovely thing, not just a difficult dukkah that one's sharing, one's sharing a lovely thing and it was dismissed and they were, ended up feeling ashamed about it. So just to be really clear, we want PT, we want Sukkah, it's a good thing. How does it arise? How can we think of its arising? So one way we can think of it is if we take say the mode, two broad approaches, if we're thinking about concentration, just keeping the mind steady on the upper lip, the lower nostrils, etc. As the mind just keeps staying there, what's not happening at that point is the mind is not squandering and dissipating energy through thought, through distraction. The mind is collecting its energy. So in electronics, there's something called a capacitor, I don't know if you know what that is. It's an electronic thingy that basically it does exactly that, it gathers electric charge. So one way you can think about what PT is, is from the concentration point of use, you're just not squandering energy, you're not dissipating it as I said and it begins to gather. But it also, as I said, it's not just nailing your mind to an object, you're also going to need the refinement, the subtleizing of the object if you're using the concentration approach. So PT won't arise just from kind of looking at something, it also needs this kind of the quality of attention and also the subtlety of the object and the attention in order for PT to arise. If you're going by the concentration rate. PT can also arise just from gathering the energy, say in practices like Qigong, you're actually gathering energy and the QI and the PT are very close, they're very close. Are they separate, are they different things, are they not different things? I'd say it's on a spectrum and as we gather the QI and begin to feel it more positively, we can call it PT, what becomes PT. We also just said with insight ways of looking, there's a letting go, there's a release of clinging and in that, that fabricates less. There's less fabrication of the bodily perception. Samadhi, I'll come back to this, it's such an important point, I'm going to come back to this as the retreat goes on. What samadhi really is, or perhaps again the most fruitful, the most helpful way of conceiving of what samadhi is, is as we deepen in samadhi, when we're fabricating, there is less fabrication of perception, less fabrication of self, or certainly less fabrication of dukkha, definitely, is less fabrication of self. There's less fabrication of bodily perception and there's less fabrication of any perception at all and that's what the whole spectrum of the Jhanas, you can understand it in one framework and that's the most important way of understanding it and that way of understanding it will unlock all kinds of other doors in terms of the whole of the Dharma practice and liberation. So how does PT arise? It arises also, one other way is through insight ways of looking, let go of clinging, therefore fabricate less, therefore less fabrication of body and PT, perceiving the body as PT is a less fabricated perception of the body. Or we could say another way is the energy body, working with the energy body to shape it, to fabricate it so that there's pleasure and PT there. Or as I said before, it's just an openness of being, an openness of heart and that allows PT to flow, like PT wants to be there, it wants to come and it's just the openness. Once it's there, then we have work and play to do which is I need to consolidate this, stabilize it and absorb into it so that it can become the first Jhana if PT is what we're talking about as opposed to happiness or something else that's central to other Jhanas. When, it's interesting, when and none of this is again, there's always going to be exceptions but it tends to be the case that if I'm using the concentration method, when the PT comes, it tends to erupt very suddenly and quite intensely, concentrating, concentrating, okay, I can definitely feel like I'm in a deep estate concentration but when the PT comes, it kind of bursts through into the body experience, into consciousness. Or one might even find oneself already in a Jhana, everything's there, not just the PT. The other way, working as I said, this ember that we try to get like a fire working with the energy body, that tends to be, it's not always, tends to be that the PT builds more gradually so there's a more gradual movement into the full PT experience. Some of you may, how many people have heard the term access concentration? Yeah, okay, quite a lot of you. I don't use that, I mean the Buddha never used it, it's not a phrase the Buddha ever used, it comes I think from the Vasuddhimagga which is a text we may or may not come back to, a commentarial text about 500 years after the Buddha. I don't tend to use it, the Buddha never used it. What does it mean? Well, it's kind of like you can feel sometimes if you're concentrating, let's say on the breath, there's a kind of, at some point there's a kind of quantum shift where you just feel like, oh now the mind is really settled and really getting to settle on its object, usually the breath is subtler at that point for example, usually things feel more harmonized, so you're not in jhaniya, there's probably no PT if you're in the concentration method, but it's just a kind of marking point of yeah, okay, where we've settled a little bit. You can use it if you like, I don't tend to find it that helpful really, but it's fine. Sometimes I think, well actually I could really sense, it's more the case that each jhana has its own particular access concentration once you do a lot of jhana practice, but it really doesn't matter if it's helpful for you in terms of getting a sense of where you're at, go for it, but I don't tend to use it, it doesn't matter. I'm happy to talk about it with you though. With the breath at one point, if that's the method, yeah, there can be these kind of quantum shifts at different points, and so for example, I think I mentioned it already, let's say again, just follow my example, the breath at the nose, at the upper lip, at some point, as it starts to go well, that area starts to feel larger and start to feel like, actually it's about the size of my whole head or about the size of my whole body, and so this is a good development, this is a good thing, and that movement there is all, is part of, it's on its way, it's, yeah, let's say part of or an element of the whole movement towards whole body PT or paralleling that or something like that. Another analogy you could use instead of the capacitor analogy is like, you know, when you hold a magnifying glass and you catch the sun rays and you got it on some dry leaves or something, it's going to make those leaves ignite, right? It's gathering the energy of the mind, that's a way we can think of it, it's gathering energy until it ignites in PT, but as I said, it needs not just that, it needs part of the gathering, part of the energizing will be the quality of the attention, more important than the quantity we've talked about now three times, quality more important than quantity, quantity is still important, but secondary, and quality you already said includes lots of different factors, so. Now Andy asked a question, yesterday, I want to see, I think I lost a piece of paper, but I see if I answer it now in the flow of what I'm saying, and if not we can, so I talked about subtleizing, like the sort of encouraging of making things subtle or allowing things to get subtle. When we're talking about concentration at one point, then the object, in this case the breath sensations at that one point need to get or will get as part of the deepening concentration more and more subtle, and the attention needs to become correspondingly subtle, so if I can even encourage all that to become more and more subtle, that's great, I certainly need to encourage the attention to get more and more subtle, so the object itself becomes more subtle and the attention becomes more subtle, I encourage that. If I'm going by the other way, the sort of coaxing of the whole energy body experience gradually, then my experience of the different frequencies in the energy body will maybe include both subtle and gross frequencies, that we want to be open to all of that, I want to be sensitive to both subtle and gross experiences, but the experience of the energy body as a whole on its way to the first Jhana, unlike the experience of the breath which gets at one point, which gets more and more subtle, the experience of the energy body doesn't get more subtle on its way to the first Jhana, you're actually building more, so it's less subtle, you understand? There might be lots of frequencies at first, but I'm actually building this, it's getting less subtle, so don't confuse this, they're kind of slightly different. However, as you go through all the Jhanas, there is as I said a spectrum of subtlety over eight Jhanas, the third Jhana is way more subtle than the first, the second Jhana is actually more subtle than the first, the third Jhana is more subtle than the second, the fourth is more subtle, etc, it's a spectrum of increasing subtlety, so as I said the eighth Jhana is also unspeakably subtle, unspeakably refined, so there's different kinds of this word subtle applies in different ways, does that answer your question Andy? Yeah, good. So let's say with this idea of subtle, just for a moment, there's sometimes, I remember very early in my practice in a very different tradition hearing about the subtle breath and I was, oh what's that, that sounds interesting, and so partly what it means is just this subtleized breath, this breath that has become subtle through the calming or that one encourages to become subtle, so the Anapanasati Sutta, the Sutra on the mindfulness of breathing, the first instruction is the practitioner breathes long and knows they're breathing long just as a turner, whatever a turner is, does anyone know what a turner is? Okay, some, it's probably some kind of, yeah some kind of woodwork or weaving or something like that, not weaving, this would work, and so they're turning something for some reason, probably because someone is paying them to do that, and they're knowing, they're knowing, it's so oftentimes it's read passively, like I know I'm doing a long one as opposed to, no, now I need to do a long one, therefore I will do a long one, and I know I'm doing a long one, to me it's more active, I will deliberately breathe long, and then the second instruction is I will deliberately breathe short, and the shorter breath is a calming, it's already a subtleizing with the shorter breath, generally speaking, so there's this natural movement towards the subtleizing of the breath, the calming of the breath, and the encouragement of that, however, there's another possible meaning of this very subtle breath, and I don't know if you've ever noticed this, sometimes you can, this, this, the breath can feel quite gross or it can feel stuck somewhere, like it's just a new sort of kind of yanking it or heaving it to kind of smooth through a constriction in the throat or something, and again if I don't get to, so sometimes that's helpful, just okay find a way of breathing that's helpful, but and smooth it out, etc, sometimes that's really helpful, but sometimes if I don't get too obsessed, and I'm using that word obsessed in a very subtle way, because we can get very subtly obsessed in meditation, if I don't get too obsessed, then here's this breath that's actually a bit stuck somewhere, a bit rough, a bit gross, a bit uneven, and actually at the same time somehow it's almost like there's another breath or another level of breath that's way more subtle and is already smooth, very very subtle, it's almost like, but if I need to be not so obsessed and a bit more spacious, a bit more receptive, my antennae a bit more receptive and subtle, even notice it, so I can sometimes find that breath and I forget about the one that feels rough, it's almost like they're going on at the same time in some kind of weird way, as I concentrate on the the subtler one, as I find it and attune to it, as we said yesterday, what happens when I attune to it? It amplifies it, it gets amplified, that the other one just kind of fades, I'm not worried about it anymore, it amplifies the subtle breath in my consciousness, that becomes what I'm concentrating on, again sensitivity, receptivity, and the kind of opportunistic attunement, oh oh there's something here that I hadn't realized, and then opportunistic, the door opens, I kind of let's just gently go with that, find that, go with that, sometimes, this is akin to, this is another level of something I've already mentioned which is in a way even more subtle that applies probably much more usually when you've already experienced quite a lot of jhanas. Again, sometimes the mind won't settle down, the energy body doesn't feel right, it's just not quite happening, but again if I don't get too sucked into that problem, just spacious kind of gentle attunement, there's a level of the mind, let's call it, there's a level of dimension of the being, better to say, that's actually already peaceful, already imbued with a certain jhanic quality, it's probably much more obvious once you're very familiar with that jhanic quality, and as it just won't settle down in the sitting or today or whatever it is, but just little spacious, opportunistic, my antennae are up, and then there's something akin to the beginnings of the piece, of the kind of piece that's characteristic of the third jhana, and I'm just gonna dive there, and in diving there I attune to it, and in attuning to it, it amplifies it, and the other stuff just kind of dissolves, that becomes, that takes over my experience, so this business of finding the second kind of subtle breath is akin to that, it's just the same thing at a different scale perhaps, and then we also mentioned just on subtlety, we also mentioned that if you're gonna use the imaginal poetic sense of the object, that that's really quite a subtle thing, it's really just a couple of drops of this magic essential oil or whatever it is that you're dropping in, really quite subtle. Okay, so there's two emphases, like I said, broadly speaking, of concentration versus this kind of tending to coaxing sensitivity to the energy body and developing that. Whichever way, yeah, at some point whichever way you've gone into your jhana or PT or happiness or whatever it is, sometimes the emphasis is more needed, more concentration, more focus needed, more effort needed, and for some people that's often the case, more effort, more concentration, for other people or other times, or even once PT has arisen, then it's still, and I'll go into this today and tomorrow, so what do I need to do now that PT has arisen? It might be more focus, more concentration, maybe on the original object, but then on the PT itself, and that's what I'm doing. Other times it's actually, as I said yesterday, don't underestimate the significance of this or the importance or how crucial it can be. Other times the emphasis and the intention needs to be more surrender, more opening, more abandoning. So you can move emphasis and you will, and I'll come back to this. It's not that you get locked into one emphasis, but what's needed right now, and then generally, as I said, as a practitioner, as a human being over time, what do I need? And sometimes I said it yesterday, sometimes the person, I just need more focus, more focus, more focus, it's not what you need. It's not what you need. You need a bit more of the other, or maybe really to experience that, to gently develop in opening, surrendering, abandoning. Through that there's the deepening, the sort of progression, the consolidating through this balance, this play. I don't know if you've noticed already on this retreat or other retreats, but if your intention is focus, concentration, if that's your emphasis and if that's your conceptual framework of what you're doing, if that's your view of what we're doing here, focus, concentrating, that that very intention, emphasis of intention, focus and concentration, it has obviously a lot of good results, but it also has some negative results. So that when there's noise or some things, birds or whoever is someone in the meditation hall, that with that intention and that emphasis, it's much more likely that the noise is aversion to the noise. Has anyone noticed this? No one. Okay. The intention, intentions set up the flavor of perceptions. If that wasn't my intention, the noise would not, I would not have aversion at that point. The aversion scuppers the possibility of jhana. It takes away the possibility of jhana. So that's quite interesting. It's not that one shouldn't practice that way. It's just something to know. If I'm practicing this way, if I have, or rather even more broadly speaking, more broadly, if I have this intention, it will have these consequences on my perception. It will likely have these consequences on whatever that intention is. We could speak lots on that, but so it's not that one shouldn't, but one should realize, oh, that's going to be part of my territory if I'm going for the concentration thing. I don't know. Is it a little less likely that there's aversion if one's going the other way with the whole body and the coaxing of the wellbeing? If that's the conceptual framework, if that's the intention, if that's the emphasis. Because then really, as we played earlier today, then actually any approach is available. So here's aversion. We can just put into the energy body some meta. Whereas if I go to meta once I'm focusing on the breath, I'm actually doing a whole different practice. Or I can relax the aversion with an insight way of looking, different insight ways of looking. And the whole thing becomes much more workable. And with the subsidence of aversion, there is the arising of happiness. With the subsidence of aversion, there is the arising of happiness. So it's not to say choose this one or that one, but it's to be wise to causes and conditions, and intentions are causes and conditions, and they have effects, all kinds of effects, effects that we don't often anticipate or realize. So focus and concentration, really important. Another way of considering those terms or what's happening with Samadhi is words like collectiveness or integrity. Remember that I think I said it yesterday, the meaning of Samadhi originally in Sanskrit was, maybe it still had that meaning, I don't know if hundreds of years later, and it was more like agreement and harmony. So Samadhi as integrity, meaning the elements of my being, of my being are in agreement in harmony. There's an integrity to my being and a collectiveness of energy, mind, and desire. A collectiveness and integrity of energy, mind, and desire. Now when I put it like that, that to me has a lot more implications for my life and my work and my personality and how I am in relationship. Yes, ADHD is supposedly an epidemic in our culture and mobile phones and screen time and too many WhatsApps and Facebooks and all that, certainly. But most, I know countless people who are perfectly capable of concentrating very, very well on their work, on a relationship with someone in a creative project, etc., and they've never spent ten seconds on a meditation cushion, the first thing about it. But when we come, we slightly conceive it differently, collectiveness, integrity, these are of energy, mind, and desire. And think of these more broadly as life, as relevant to life, relevant to how I'm living my life, how I manifest as, how I manifest my personhood. So when there's that collectiveness, integrity of mind, energy, desire, body, at that point there's power. One has, I don't mean power over, I mean power. The being has power, the person has power. And you can sense it in a person and you can see over their life, is this person, has their soul power, the power that you sense in them, the power that they then also feel or don't even recognize they don't feel or whatever. Is it growing? Is it lessening? So it starts with these things start to be much more relevant than how can I keep my concentration on something, which for most people is not really beyond a certain point of basic sort of human ability to focus on something. It's hardly relevant. But collectiveness, integrity, power, soul power, these are important things. Then you start to relate that, yeah, that little bit of alcohol, it affects that. It's not that it's a yes for the time, it might affect my ability to concentrate. More significantly it's affecting something about my personhood and my capacity to really cohere and show up with soul power, with the power and the integrity of my being, body, mind, energy, desire as a habit showing up that it's cohere, that there's energy there, it's collected that has integrity or just people who listen to the radio, it's just on, it's just on or the TV's on or a lot of TV, a lot of radio. It's doing something to your soul. That's a lot more significant than how concentrated you can be in that sense. Just think of it in broader ways. Or again, I've talked about this wholeheartedness and how significant that is again for my life, for my personhood, for my relationships, for my work, for the service that I want to do. So when there's not this capacity and this practice of being really wholehearted, really gathered like that, then one is almost like dissipating energy, dissipating mind, dissipating one's, I don't know, one's being habitually in probably very small ways. And over time you can kind of get a sense something in the being has gotten a bit flaccid. So the very personality is different. You just, there's just not, something's flabby and flaccid in the soul, in the being. And sometimes you can sense that in people. There's just not much sensitivity there. So from another perspective, focus, concentration, we think about them a little bit different, actually. These are very, very significant. If we think about this collectiveness, integrity, this sort of thing is very, very significant for the being. Okay, let's come back to the energy body way of working, that second way of working. What's quite common, no, not quite common, extremely common, it will happen every day to some degree or other many times a day, is that something in the energy body does not feel comfortable. There's some constriction or block here or there. It feels like somewhere in the energy body. So this is really, really normal part of normal experience, part of the human experience. It will do that. The energy body is not a static thing, goes blocks, unblocks, constriction. Yes, we can have very habitual constrictions, but even if we don't, there's going to be a coming and going of constriction in the energy body, different places. So in meditation, what do we do with that? Because the constriction, the blockage is not going to feel good. It's the opposite of PT, if you like. So one way again is, don't forget, open up the awareness, stretch it over that whole body space, a little bit bigger than the anatomical body. What happens when there's constriction or generally something we don't like is the attention shrinks. Open it out again and the very opening it out does something. There's a mutual dependence here. Constriction somewhere actually then shrinks the awareness, opening up the awareness can sometimes open up the constriction. First thing, second thing to play with in meditation if you're working with the energy body is, so if you're working with the energy body in the breath, just imagine the breath energy going right through, flowing smoothly right through that constriction. Just imagine that. Or imagine a current of energy just flowing right through. So it could be with the breath, could be not with the breath. Use your imagination. It might want to flow through that, let's say the constriction in my throat. It might want to flow through the throat and up out the top of my head or right down the top through the bottom of my body. Maybe it wants, does it want to flow up? Does it want to flow down? Feel what feels, feel what feels like it's helpful. Again, you're just using the imagination to shape, to fabricate, to open the energy body experience. Let's again say I have a constriction in my throat. I can imagine the breath coming in and out, not from the mouth and the nose, but coming in and out directly from the throat or the back of the throat, the back of the neck. I just imagine that and does that. Or maybe it wants to go out the sides this way and that imagination can unlock something. If you're practicing meta, let's say, and you've got this constriction in the throat or wherever or anywhere there's a constriction. What if you play with imagining the very place where there's the constriction? Imagine that as the center of the radiation of the meta. The meta is the last place you would think of because it feels the worst and the tightest and the least like love, but just imagine it's coming from there and see what that does. Another possibility, I guess it's the fifth if we're listing them. Let's say for example I feel a constriction in my mid belly somewhere. Now let's say I feel a constriction around my heart, but my lower belly feels actually quite nice or some well-being there. Or the other way around, doesn't matter. There's a place where it feels good, relatively good, and there's a place where it doesn't feel good. One of the things you can do is just imagine those places as connected. There's some kind of energy tube or something that just connects the place. I'm not moving anything around, I'm not yanking, I'm just connecting them in my imagination. The place that feels good and the place that doesn't feel so good. Just see what happens. I'm just connecting two places in my imagination very lightly. There's also the possibility of here's this constriction, here's this blockage, here's this discomfort, and bringing an insight way of looking that you're already familiar with, and looking at that very sense of constriction, that very sense of blockage with that insight way of looking. In the context of samadhi practice, jhana practice, maybe that's, unless the insight way of looking is your primary way of working, maybe that would be a kind of last resort, maybe. That's that important. But basically, again, those are extremely powerful practices, extremely powerful. To look at this blockage that way, through that lens or that way of looking, will basically dissolve it as long as you're not, come on, dissolve, dissolve, dissolve, pushing it too much. Another thing to say, and again, which is really, really important in the context of jhana and samadhi practice is, okay, here's this constriction, here's this block, I don't always have to focus on it. I can keep my attention, I will have to work to keep my attention where it's pleasant, where it feels pleasant, where there's pity perhaps, or where it even feels just okay. So this is a, you know, the tendency will be to get dragged into, either get dragged into where there's a difficult feeling, constriction or blockage, or to get dragged completely outside and start daydreaming. But if I can keep my attention, let's say in that example, my belly feels good, and my heart area doesn't, I keep it in the belly, don't get sucked into, or my knees are aching, don't get sucked into, just stay with where it's pleasant and focus there and enjoy that. Now when I say where, where might be a bodily location, it might be that the body has a bit dissolve in, it's just a kind of spatial location, it's the kind of somewhere around there in space. But it also might be, I don't know if where is obviously the right word, but it also might be a frequency. This is similar to what I said before. One can, here's this discomfort, here's this constriction, this blockage, it's a certain energetically, in energetic terms, it's a certain kind of frequency. Can I find another frequency that's not so much a spatial location as a kind of mental location, and then get into that, find it, dive underneath, get into that. Again, with more experience of different frequencies, certainly with more Jhana experience, that becomes just a more and more common possibility, it's more, much more accessible, that kind of thing. Most insight meditators, most Vipassana meditators are kind of trained, either deliberately or just by default, but when there's something difficult in the body, when there's dukkha, when there's constriction, when something doesn't feel good, when there's a contraction, that the attention goes there. We're encouraged to do that, mostly in the way we teach insight meditation, and it can become a kind of just, well that's what we do. As soon as something's difficult, that's where the mind goes, it's not even a choice I make. One realizes, oh, it's just a habit, I pay attention to what's difficult, where there's constriction, where there's contraction, where there's dukkha. It might also be the case that insight meditation attracts certain psychological types and inclinations, it might be, but it's also a kind of training that happens both directly and indirectly. The willingness to do that, the willingness to go where it's difficult, and to feel it, and to open to it, and to work with it, this is invaluable, it's such a precious thing. Willingness is not enough. I need to also have the kind of mindfulness I bring matters, because I can bring an attention there, I can bring a kind of mindfulness there, and it just makes it worse, and I'm being a good meditator, and I'm having the willingness, which is great, and a good intention, but my mindfulness has just a bit of aversion in it, and it's making it worse. Or I can be with it in a way that just doesn't do anything to it, or I can be with it, the attention, the mindfulness has skillful qualities in it. Mindfulness is never one thing, there's no such thing as pure mindfulness, there's no such thing as pure mindfulness. Mindfulness always has views, conceptions, some kind of relationship with the object, a little bit of aversion, a lot of aversion, a little bit of greed, always has some, if we're talking really, really subtle, there's no such thing as pure mindfulness, and what makes or breaks what determines what happens is what's with the mindfulness. So it's great that we're willing to do that as insight meditators, we're all practiced in that hopefully, great that we're willing, but it also really matters, can I have the skill to bring what's actually a helpful mindfulness there, a helpful attention. So that's all great, but now we also want, and as I said to you, what we want is range, we'll set on the opening for range, range, range, choice, freedom of choice, so sure, I can go where it's difficult, I'm willing to do that, I'm not afraid to do that, if it's very little bit difficult, if it's difficult in this way or that way, if it's really, really difficult, I'm willing to go there. I'm able to work with it as time goes on, and I get more practice, I'm able to work with it in all kinds of ways, lots of ways, but also I'm willing and able not to go there. I put the mind here where it's pleasant, I won't go there, I'm training the mind to stay with the pleasant. So when we open up to Jhana practice, this actually becomes quite an important skill, and quite something that one's working against the grain, if one has done a lot of insight practice. So with training, we can have much more range and much more freedom of choice about what we do in regard to the difficulty. Remember when I first taught this in here in 12, 13 years ago, a summer to retreat, and there were people there, but that's not proper meditation, that's not proper meditation, the best meditation is to be with what is, and so if it hurts, then I need to be with what is, and even if it doesn't hurt here, somehow the hurt is more what is than the place that not hurts. But despite that, or as well as that, again, no, we have to ask about ontology, about reality here. Is it really what is? Is it really what is? What am I believing about what is? Or is it a fabricated perception? The answer is yes. And I have to understand that, not just as I have to actually get in there and work with things and play with things until I know in my heart, deep down in my mind, in my life, I know this is a fabricated perception, and I know how to fabricate it differently, at least at times I have that capacity. So we want to train to open up that range, and we want to understand there's something, there's so much about the nature of reality that's involved in all this, say, Jhana work, what does that have to do with insight has everything to do with insight. Is it really as real as you think it is? What is real? What is reality? These are fundamentally important questions, and we get locked into certain views, and sometimes we get locked into certain views that come out of our very Dharma listening and training and thinking. So there can be, there will be at times discomfort and pain, as we said, at the beginning of the retreat, you really want to not go there too much, and I'll talk more about this tomorrow, in fact, but it's also possible to perceive, deliberately perceive the unpleasant as pleasant. Here's this pain in my knee, sitting in meditation, and I can deliberately play with the perception, there's that key phrase, play with perception. I can play with perception and perceive the unpleasant as pleasant. I might perceive, so here's that pain in the knee, I decide to perceive it as PT with training, that's totally possible. I decide to perceive it as happiness. So the texture of my knee becomes happiness, my knee becomes happiness. I decide to see it with training as stillness, as a luminous stillness. My knee becomes, the pain has gone, the knee has gone, and what is there is a luminous beautiful stillness. Training, training through playing with perception. So one way of doing that is you just spread the PT, and the PT spreads over the difficult area, as you know, there's one option. Another is this more direct way, where I'm actually looking at something, and because I have enough familiarity with PT, and because I'm not locked into a view of the reality of this thing is it's a painful knee, so there's familiarity with PT, and there's the absence of a locked-in view about reality, and then one just sees it as PT, and one therefore experiences it as PT or happiness or stillness or whatever. What did the Buddha say? Perception attainments. The Jhana's are perception attainment. What's the best way of thinking about this? We say playing with perception. We're playing with perception. This is, as I said already, this is way more significant than the whole question of, is this a Jhana or is this not a Jhana? Did I achieve the third Jhana or the third Jhana? So-and-so defines it. That seems so relevant and so important. This, what I'm just talking about now, this ability, and not just the ability, the possibility, the recognition and the experience of the possibility of doing this with, for example, a pain in the knee, that's way more significant than whether I have achieved correctly the first Jhana or the third Jhana. It's way more significant. Magic. We use that word, magic. So this whole business about the question of reality, about emptiness, which is to do with what is the reality of things, about ways of looking, about fabrication, about perception. Again, that's the key word, about playing with perception. This is absolutely fundamental to the most, it's fundamental to liberating insight. It's fundamental to the whole Dharma. It's fundamental to liberating insight and it's way more important, as I said, than third Jhana fourth, you know, whatever it is. Did I get it? Did I not? So, PT arises and the Buddha says, don't snatch at it and don't snatch at the first Jhana. So what does that mean? I've already said it when the insight ways are looking. Here it's arising, however it's arising, and I'm just, I'm just letting it arise. And if I've got another object, like the nose sensations that I'm considering, I'm just letting it arise, kind of at the side of my, I'm aware that it's arising, because I've got that whole body background, right? I'm aware it's arising, and part of me is enjoying it and opening to it, but I'm still focused on my one thing. And then when it's ready, it means when it's kind of strong enough that it's definitely pleasant, let's just say that. And when it's sustained enough, then very gently, as described with insight ways of looking, very gently, I can make that my primary object, the PT. And then we go back to what I said yesterday, these modes of attention, where I really nuzzle into it, really go penetrate into it, or really, really open myself to it, for example. And I also said yesterday, so another job that we have to do, another work or play mission that we have to do is spreading the PT. So Buddha said in the first genre, it's spread. No, no spot of the body untouched, completely suffused, saturated, etc. So how do we get it to spread? I mean, sometimes it will be spread already, and that's great, then you don't have to do anything. But let me run through a list of possibilities. And one is, here's the PT. And let's say it's only in my, only in my face, or that sort of region, my head region. Sometimes what happens is because it's quite sort of captivating, the awareness actually shrinks a little bit. So one thing you can do is, to help it spread, is just open up the awareness again, open up the whole energy body, and just the opening up of the attention to the whole energy body, the PT will naturally spread like a gas will naturally spread to fill a space. The balloon, you make the balloon bigger, the balloon of attention, the gas will fill the balloon, the air will fill the balloon. So that's one possibility. Another possibility is you can mix, so to speak, mix the breath with the PT, and kind of imagine and begin to feel like you're breathing PT, or, or the breath energy is kind of massaging and moving the PT through the body. So you breathe in, when we talked about these currents of breath energy, maybe you breathe in, you know, through the heart center, and these currents of energy go down your body, and in doing that, the breath can kind of massage the PT through the rest of the body if it's just, let's say, around your chest, or whatever. But again, this is all very playful, very experiment, experimental. Mixing the breath with the PT, or just getting the breath energy to sort of help to move the PT in different places in the body. You can just, thirdly, you can just imagine that it's spread. Again, it's quite, can be quite amazing, the power of the imagination. Just imagine that it's spread, it's filling the whole body, and then, lo and behold, you might find that, well, that's my experience now. Okay, so feel it, enjoy it. You can imagine, this is something I may come back to briefly, you can imagine the PT mixed with white golden light, as if the PT is white golden light, it's just another, you can feel it, and you can also see it, and then you imagine that white golden light filling the whole space, the whole energy body space, and as you imagine the white golden light doing that, it brings the PT with it. You can, this is fifth, I think, fifthly, you can imagine, actually, this is very similar to something you said before, just imagine these two places. So here's the PT, let's say, around my face, around my head and throat, which is a very common place for it to start, it's there, but I don't feel anything down in my belly, there's no PT there. So just, just again, have an awareness at this point, and have an awareness of this place down in the belly, so the awareness of where there's PT, an awareness of the place where there isn't PT, and just connect them with a tube, an imaginary tube, just connect them, see what happens. You're not forcing anything, you're not imagining anything moving, you're just putting two places of the energy body space in connection with each other, or the body space in connection with each other. It might be, and I think I mentioned this yesterday, this is number six, it might be that moving lightly and playfully and kind of relatively slowly between those two modes of attention, the penetrating kind of narrow focus and probing and the more receptive, it might be that that very movement works the PT and through and allows it to spread through the body, through the body space. Eventually, what happens is that every time you experience PT, it's just always spread. It's just always completely filling the whole body. So there's so much in Jhana practice about just, it's almost like the the chitta and the bodily experience, the energy experience, just getting used to something and it becoming normal, it becoming completely normal, so that after a while, every time you have PT, it's just automatic, it's never just in one place, it's just always spread. That will become, there's always exceptions, but that will eventually become pretty common. But last, this would be now number seven, thank you, yeah, number seven is, okay, sometimes it won't spread, you've tried all this and it won't spread, don't worry about it, just enjoy it where it is and get into it where it is. Yeah, so okay, it's just around here, around my throat and head or whatever it is, I've tried all this other shenanigans, it doesn't spread, just get into it and enjoy it. Don't bother about it, enjoy it. And that's actually really, really important, really important. Also, don't worry about, you know, the Buddha says, no, not one spot of the body, it's not like you have to go through and say, well, how's my little toe on my left side? How's my, you don't have to get so consumed with the kind anatomical image or picture of the body. It's really more just this whole, this whole space. If you still do have a sense of separate toes and all that, that doesn't matter either, but you don't, you certainly don't have to. It's more like you just sense the whole space, sense the whole energy body space and allow or gently encourage the PT to fill that whole space in these different ways. There is a movement in Jhana anyway for the kind of dissolving of the form of the body. Okay, now people are different. For some people it happens, maybe this is, I'm not sure percentage-wise, but for me, certainly it happens in the first Jhana. It's just, that's part of the characteristic of the first Jhana, that the bodily, the sense of the body just becomes a bit like what we said in those little games we played. It just becomes a sort of amorphous white light filled with PT. There's not such a sense of, I could kind of find my toes and all the rest of it in there, but people are different though, but anyway there's a movement towards the dissolving of the bodily form, which means we don't have to worry too much about is the PT in my foot or whatever like that. It's more just a sense of yeah, it's really filling this whole space, this whole experience, the experience of the body. Again, back to this perception thing. Really one way of conceiving what happens in the Jhana is in the first Jhana, the bodily experience, the bodily perception becomes PT. My experience of my body is a body of PT, is a space of PT. In the second Jhana, the body becomes Rupa. The first four Jhana is called Rupa Jhana, which means body. The body becomes happiness, and if you're still working with the breath, which is in a way an element of the body, the breath becomes happiness. Breathing happiness into a body of happiness. In the third Jhana, it becomes this kind of peacefulness in the fourth, this kind of luminous stillness, etc. The energetic body space becomes that, the body becomes that. So there's a gradual, at some point it's different, there's a gradual dissolving of the detailed sense of the form of the body, the body dissolves we could say. Sometimes what happens for people, and again, individual is a lot of different conditions and things over time, but sometimes what happens is there's too much, it feels like there's too much PT, or the PT feels like this is too much to bear. It's so intense, or so strong, or so pleasant. There's one thing that's kind of more important than anything else there, is that, okay, usually when that's the case, what needs to happen is more opening. It's the opposite. If I feel this is too much to bear, it's too strong, it's too, I can't handle this, then actually there's some contraction of the being, some aversion, some slight holding of pushing away, like I'm trying to push back the waters a little bit, could be very, very subtle. The thing, the primary thing we need to do when it feels or when you think this is too strong, is open. Open the space of the energy body, open to the flow of the PT. Oftentimes PT has a flow to it, oftentimes it's an upward flow from up the body. More opening, open even more, put your opening dial on 11, 150%, more opening, more surrender, more abandoning. It's the opposite of what you feel like doing when it feels like too much. You have to go to the counterintuitive energetic response. Sometimes talking to people in interviews... PT can be a bit like an analogy, can be like water flowing down a mountain side, like making a river down a mountain side. Where it starts, in the initial, sometimes it can be really fast, and then it encounters rocks as it goes down. Where it encounters rocks, you get all this white water, rapids and froth and stuff. Two things here, if I then put more rocks in the way, because I don't like it, because I just don't want it to be quite so intense, what am I going to get? I mean, unless I actually put a dam there, but let's say you can't, and you put some... What am I going to get? I'm getting more white water. I'm going to get more froth. I'm going to get more... I need to do the opposite. I don't open, surrender. A band really like, okay, how much can I really open my body? It's almost like this, just opening up the chest, opening up. Just completely let it flow through. Oftentimes it wants to flow right through, right up out the top of the head. Just open, open, open. There's usually at that point a subtle, or sometimes not so subtle, there's some degree of aversion and contraction, and that's causing the problem. What it's also doing is slowing down the progress of this river, because this mountain river, as it goes down the mountain, as it winds its way, it will find... it's naturally going to find its way to calmer waters. As PT evolves, I've already said this in a way indirectly, as PT evolves, it naturally gets calmer. There are phases of practice when it just feels like this really is a bit much. It's too intense. It's on its way. It's just a phase. What we want is, okay, well, how can I just help that phase do its thing? Aversion, contraction, is not helping it do its thing. It's the opposite. I need to open, open, let it flow. You might have to put up with yet super intense. Again, someone else would give their right and left arms for this kind of level of pleasure, but that's where you have to open, open, open. Then it will go through its thing and it will calm down. Sometimes even the very opening, in that moment, it actually feels better, because the contraction is what then starts to get... I'm not even sure this is pleasant anymore. It's partly the aversion, coloring the experience. Open, surrender, abandon. Really, what does it mean to do that? Find ways to do that. It will... Then once you look, find the pleasure in it. Find the pleasure in it. Find the pleasure in it. Two things. Open, abandon, surrender, and find the pleasure. That will usually take care of it. It should help in that moment, absolutely. Then it should also help the process just unfold more freely and without getting stuck in this certain place for a while. Sometimes, person, either the PT is so strong, it's like, I'm not sure it's actually pleasant, or it's not quite strong enough. I say, I'm not sure it's pleasant. Again, playing with perception, you can actually just decide to see it as pleasant. Just decide to see it as pleasant. Just play with that. Play with the perception. We're back to this idea of malleability again, of playing with perception. In Samadhi, in Jhana, the whole system is so sensitive, so sensitive to these micro-shifts in ways of looking, in view, in effort levels, etc., etc. Sometimes, again, PT is very strong, perhaps even over some days, or sukha, happiness is strong. The person wants to... There's a question here. Should I move the body? There's so much energy. Should I move it somehow? Should I dance? I just feel like dancing. There's joy and there's PT, and person wants to dance. The question is, should I do that? Or when there's a lot of sukha, they can be just laughing and laughing and laughing out loud. Or should I not dance and not laugh so much, and actually let something gather? I don't think this is such a... Generally speaking, I would probably lean towards and know, let it gather. Let it gather, because again, going back to what I said earlier, several times, most of us as human beings actually haven't really allowed energy to gather. Haven't really allowed happiness to gather. We don't know what it is to have the energy body filled this way with happiness, and allow that to gather, and intensify and do its alchemical work. However, sometimes it is really helpful for someone, for a number of reasons, to dance or to move, whatever. Because sometimes that person, and to look at their life and their person and their character, sometimes there's actually a habit there of holding the body. The body's a little bit rigid, or there's a certain inhibition in terms of movement. Or with regard to laughing, there's a person who actually doesn't laugh. You're never going to find them giggling. They don't kind of laugh. Something's funny or whatever, or a little bit, but they don't kind of give themselves to laughter a lot. Sometimes, why is that? Maybe sometimes there's just a slight emotional holding. It's a personality thing. There's a slight rigidity or non-fluidity. Sometimes actually for a person, it's not the greatest weather, but doesn't mean you can't go out there in the fields and dance in the rain. If it needs to move wild, do that, or whatever it is. The danger though is that we squander the energy that's building. We squander the PT, and we squander the happiness that's building, and then it can never really mature into Jhana. It can be a tricky question, but you can experiment. Experiment with both. If you feel this is relevant, for a lot of people it won't be relevant. In the analogy before, the capacitor doesn't gather enough energy. It never really allows you to get into Jhana. But we want, as I said, to learn, to allow, and to tolerate these things to expand, to flow, to fill the being, and do their work inside. Again, just with the theme of sometimes really strong PT, what can happen, sometimes for some people, a minority of people, is that the PT is very strong, or the energy gets very strong, and the physical body starts shaking, kind of tremoring, or shaking, or jerking, or this kind of thing. This is quite an important thing here. Now, some people have the view, oh that's a catharsis, you're releasing something, etc., etc. Speaking as someone who got trapped in all that for quite some years, I feel this is really important. It's important to have the right view here, and the right approach. What can happen with those kinds of movements is that they very easily can become habitual, and the body just habitually starts to shake in meditation, or jerk, or whatever it is. In my case, it would even do it when I listen to music, or it was starting to do it all the time. Some habitual loop had become set up. This is different now than the kind of body movement of, for example, some of you know, when the PT comes, the head tilts back because of that upward flow. Some of you will know that, actually even doing the movement brings the PT. I'm talking about something different, I'm talking about sort of shaking or jerking kind of thing. The head tilt back thing is not anywhere near a problem. If you cannot do it, I have a bad habit, I do it, so don't do what I say, not what I do. But that's less of a problem. But this moving thing is actually, and shaking is quite important. We need, again, maybe you can use your imagination a little bit. First thing is, we need to see if you can keep the physical body still during meditation. If this is, for a lot of people, nothing like this is going to arise, it's not an issue, but I'm saying it because it is for some people. Can I keep the physical body still? And maybe you just set a gentle but firm intention that that's the case at the beginning of the meditation. But generally, I'm trying to keep the physical body still, and what I'm allowing instead of the energy moving the physical body, is I'm allowing the energy to move inside the energy body space and even move out. So again, maybe it's as if metaphorical or analogy would be like there's, again, it's a bad analogy, but let's say there's too much water and water pressure in the inner energy pipes, and they start bursting the pipes and rattling the whole structure. What we need to do is open the pipes, make bigger pipes, let it flow more. So again, imagine your body opening, opening to this energy flow, opening the channels, the currents, so it can flow. Allowing the inner, so-called, so to speak, inner movement of energy rather than the physical body moving. And usually, you will find that that takes care of things. Sometimes, again, it wants to go out, so it might want to fly out the top of your crown chakra and come out like that and come down as a fountain, whatever it is. So use your imagination. It might want to just move inside. It might want to move out. How does it want to move? What feels good? What feels like there's some ease and release to this too much that means then the body does not need, the physical body does not need to move because the energy is being allowed to move. When the energy is being allowed to move properly without encountering blocks or constrictions, then the physical body does not need to move so much, or at all. So again, it might want to go, any time I want to fly out this way or this way or up or whatever, just fine. What does it want to do and let it do? Imagine it doing what it wants to do, and it will do what it wants to do, and then the physical body doesn't need to. Often, this kind of thing happens when there's even just a slight over-effeting. Certainly, it's more likely to happen if there's over-effort or certain, let's say, certain energy body types. It's really quite likely to happen if there's too much effort. Other people have different energy body types, and they can do a lot of effort, and it's not going to happen. They will never have anything like that. But with certain types, it can be, as I said, slight over-effeting can have massive impacts. Slight over-effeting can have subtle impacts in meditation, all kinds of subtle effects, but it can also have quite dramatic effects. Sometimes, this whole thing with the moving, it's not catharsis or anything. It's just the effort is a little too much. Nothing's being purified. Nothing is just the effort is too much, and it's putting too much energy pressure on the whole system. It's having an effect. So what does that mean? What does that imply? Again, maybe I need to play with the intensity and just back. What does it mean to just back off on the intensity pedal? What does it mean to just be a little less tight in the way I'm approaching, or my energy body is in the meditation, to have a slightly more spacious attention, to go into the more receptive mode and less of the probing mode? So all these things will affect a part of the effort and subtly backing off the effort, and they will have an effect on all that shaking business. Some, are you good for a bit more? Is that okay? Yeah. Sometimes, someone who's done a lot of insight meditation may have experienced other states of deep equanimity or vastness of awareness or these kinds of things. And then comes to Jhana practice, and here's about all PT and first Jhana and second Jhana with all this bubbly happiness and whatever it is, and kind of thinks, well, why should I bother with PT if equanimity is possible? Because I know equanimity, why should I bother with PT? And they might think, well, equanimity is the point of practice, right? Why would I bother with PT? We're trying to get to equanimity. So why would I bother with PT and with Suka, the first or second Jhana or whatever? Because equanimity is where we're going. Equanimity is not the goal, is absolutely not the goal, and nor should equanimity be mistaken for awakening. It's really, really important. Equanimity is not the goal. It's an important part of the mix of the range of what's what's available to a being, but it's not the goal and certainly not equivalent to awakening. Awakening does not equate to equanimity. Awakening is, if you want to sum it up, realizing emptiness, realizing the emptiness of everything and the implication from that, that then we can look at things in very different ways. Why? Because the thing is empty of existing independently of the way the mind looks at it. Therefore, one realizes that and it liberates the possibility of a whole flexibility of ways of looking, which one can also train in and develop that playing. It can play all these different ways, play all these perceptions. That's what awakening is. Awakening is not equanimity. So that therefore, again, practicing the malleability of the mind, the malleability of mind state, the malleability of perception, playing with perception. When we're doing that, we're actually practicing a path that resembles the goal, that resembles what awakening is. Because an awakened person knows the emptiness of absolutely everything and all they're left with, and they know, all there is, is the possibility and the flexibility of different ways of looking. So by practicing that, you're actually practicing a way of conceiving of the path and practicing the path that looks like what awakening looks like, as opposed to just trying to practice equanimity. I'm trying to be a quantumist in relation to everything all the time. That's not what awakening is and that's not even a healthy psychology, I would say. There are also some as opposed to, why should I bother with PT? Why should I bother with sukha? Sometimes there's psychological tendencies, patterns, habits. PT and sukha are quite, in a way, they're agitating, in a way they're disturbing. They're not that peaceful. They open up things. They're exciting. They move around and they do stuff. Sometimes it's not even a particular Dharma thought, or one uses a Dharma thought, but the reason one's using it is just because one's psychology doesn't want to be disturbed. I just want everything to be calm, I want the emotions to be controlled and within a certain limit. I want to either present or feel only a certain range and that can become, or it can be a habit or a habit of a pattern. That's all that my being knows. It's all my being allows is that range and therefore all this kind of welling up of stuff. I don't like it. What's actually going on there? We can, come back to something I've already said that's important, it's really, really important. We can conceive PT as energy so that when the energy body is unblocked, either through just the openness of heart, the openness of being, or when the energy body is unblocked because of the insight way of looking is releasing, clinging, and clinging causes contraction. With the release of clinging, there's a release of contraction so the energy body is naturally unblocked. When the energy body is unblocked, then naturally a human energy body system, because when it's unblocked, will naturally experience a pleasant flow of energy. We'll naturally experience PT. We can conceive of PT as energy. We can also conceive of PT as energy in the sense of we're not, in a concentration mode, I'm not dissipating energy through distraction. My mind going here and there and thinking about this or that, getting caught up in this and that, this sound, that sound, whatever it is. Therefore, the energy naturally gathers like the electronic capacitor. We can conceive of the PT as energy, but as I've said several times now, a better, more fruitful, truer, much more helpful way and much more integrated with the rest of the Dharma or way of understanding it or something is to conceive of PT as a way of perceiving the body. It's not energy really. It's not to do with unblocking your chakras or energy channels. It's not to do with gathering energy. PT is a way of perceiving the body. It's a perception of body. It's a perceptual skill. It's a perception attainment, as the Buddha might say. It's a magician's art. PT is a way of perceiving the body. Again, you may or may not quite realize just how significant this is, but I want to at least plant the seeds. So, last thing, last couple of things. PT is central to the first Jhana. It's the most important factor in the first Jhana. The first Jhana has five factors. I'm going to talk about it tomorrow. PT is central. The first Jhana has five factors. Vitakkha vichara, which I'm going to talk about when I read through the Buddha's list, I translated it as thinking. We'll come back to that. It's slightly controversial, the translation of that. But anyway, it has five factors. Vitakkha vichara or something that you've probably heard sustained, initial and sustained application. It doesn't matter what you say. Vitakkha vichara, ekha gata, which I'll explain all this tomorrow, a kind of one-pointedness, let's say, also a misleading translation. It doesn't matter. The two other factors, PT and sukha. PT we've talked about, and sukha means happiness. Those are the five factors of the first Jhana. Usually, these are conceived either consciously or unconsciously with a causal direction through them. In other words, you work at your vitakkha vichara, you work at your initial and sustained application to the meditation object. Over time, you get one-pointed or absorbed or whatever, ekha gata, and PT and sukha arise as a result. There's a movement from concentration, the concentration factors to the arising of PT and sukha. That's great. Sometimes we can work backwards. Here are these five factors. What's available right now? Sometimes people say, every time I think of this person or every time I think of this, happiness arises. It's one of the factors of the first Jhana. It's not even the primary factor. PT is the primary factor. Every time I think of this person, happiness arises. If you're skillful, if you don't snatch it, that happiness, I just linger with the happiness and lo and behold, PT is right there with it and then I don't snatch it that and the PT builds. Actually, there's five factors. What's available? I can go in starting on anyone really in a way. I'm working backwards. This principle of working backwards, where am I trying to get to rather than deciding in advance what needs to be emphasized and therefore what's relevant. Which factor and therefore which do I emphasize right now as a way into the if we're talking about the first Jhana. Both I can conceive forwardly in terms of causal connections there or I can conceive backwards. I've got five factors. Let's see which of those I can kind of access, ignite a little bit, stimulate and from that the rest of the five factors, the other four factors ignite. In a way, working with the whole energy starting to work, if I go back to the two broad methods, concentration or working with the energy body. In a way, working with the whole body and the energy body from the beginning is an example of working backwards a little bit to a certain extent because all four of the first four Jhanas, what's called the Rupa Jhanas, Rupa means body or form, all four of them involve, as I said with the Buddha's examples, leaving no spot of the body untouched by happiness or delight or pleasure, fusing, saturating, drenching, steeping the whole body. All four of the first four Jhanas involve the whole body energy body awareness and they each just have a different flavor, a different predominant flavor to that energy body awareness. When we start with the energy body awareness, we're a little bit also taking this principle of let's start backwards rather than start at a point. Let's start with the whole thing because it's going to go to the whole thing anyway. You understand? Back to these things. There's two last points. These two, I said it right at the beginning of the talk, is broadly speaking two approaches. Either you choose a point, a thing, and you just concentrate it, concentrate it with the intensity and delicacy and the directionality and all the rest of it. Out of that, you're basically practicing concentration on something, steady focus on something. Let me just interject something. That's one method. There's this other method of starting with the whole energy body and gathering the niceness there. At any time, even in, let's say you're new to the second Jhana, happiness is actually quite a subtle object. The happiness is... It can be very, very bubbly and intense, but as things calm down, it's actually quite a subtle refined object. Even if your main mode of working has been energy body and you haven't really thought about it as concentration, you're still at some times going to need to practice concentration. Somebody's going to say, okay, I need to learn how to stay steady and focused on this subtle object of happiness. At times, even, there's going to be times when your intention, your emphasis is on concentration. There may be other times where your intention is more on spreading and enjoying and other things or perception playing, like we said. At any time in the practice of Jhanas, your emphasis can shift and that's completely appropriate. Sometimes it's not really going when you say, okay, I'm just practicing concentration now, but it's not all you're doing. You're seeing that as one possible emphasis in a whole kind of mandala of possible emphasis. Does that make sense? Is that what I just said? Does that make sense? Yeah. Okay, sorry. Good. Okay. Going back to what I said at the beginning, these two broad approaches, concentration versus coaxing well-being through playing with perception and all that stuff. Yeah, they're separate, but they're not really. We're going to move between them and there's gray areas stuff, but we should move between them and think about that. At any point in Jhana practice, at any point, it's going to be relevant. They're not mutually exclusive. Okay. I think we should probably stop there rather than do some questions today. Yeah, we'll stop there. Okay. Let's have a bit of quiet together. Okay, Thank you everyone. So time for tea. Enjoy tea. And there are some interviews tonight, so if you haven't checked the board today, please check because there are some tonight. And is there anything else to...no? Okay. So enjoy tea. Visit our website at www.thed.org to learn more. And thanks.

 I want to start today with what's really the last chunk about bass or springboard practices. So two pieces around bass or springboard practices. And then you're certainly welcome to ask more and bring it to interviews of course, but this will be the last bit about that from me at the front so to speak. So there's two parts to it. The first part has to do with insight ways of looking. And in a way I mentioned it right at the beginning in the opening talk and Marco also in his question yesterday mentioned that. So what do I mean? I'm going to be very brief here because some of you... This won't be really relevant for many of you so I'm going to be pretty brief. Insight ways of looking, what does that mean? Usually we have or perhaps a very common way of thinking about insight is insight practice, that meditation is basically, one is basically mindful, paying attention and paying attention as carefully as one can and as continuously as one can. And in that careful and continuous mindfulness attention of watching one's experience etc. At some point one realizes something, one has an insight, one gets something. And so that's one kind of way of understanding what insight meditation is but also what insight is so that's great. And there's a second way which is perhaps less common but that I tend to emphasize quite a lot which is more taking an insight and using it as a lens, looking in certain ways, a way of looking. So for example, for example if one realizes that body sensations are not self, one has maybe had that experience, maybe one hasn't had that experience, one takes that understanding and then one starts looking at experience, at body sensations and seeing them deliberately over and over again as not self. They're just happening, they're not me, they're not mine. So it's more active, it's more deliberate, I'm not being mindful of waiting for insight to come, I'm looking at something in a certain way. So there are lots of these possibilities. What's key about them is that, what I would call an insight way of looking brings letting go and it brings letting go now in this moment. In other words, here's this pain in my back, my knee, whatever it is, when I look at it with an insight way of looking, it's not just, oh that's interesting, it's not self, it makes a difference to the experience, the suffering begins to lessen or dissolve, the actual experience itself of the pain or whatever it is begins to change. What defines an insight way of looking then is that there is letting go, it brings letting go in the moment. Another way of saying letting go is it releases clinging in the moment. So this painful sensation, there's clinging in the sense of aversion, I want to get rid of it. It's also clinging in the sense of it's me or mine, I'm assuming unconsciously without even thinking it. And the insight mode of looking, the insight way of looking dissolves those. Right in the moment it lessens clinging, it attenuates clinging. So there's letting go and attenuation of clinging, two ways of saying the same thing. We could say that when we cling as human beings, our energy body contracts. How do we know we're clinging to something? One of the ways is you can feel it in the energy body, there's some kind of contraction somewhere or other in the space of the energy body. When we look with an insight way of looking, which organically by definition has in it the capacity and the mode of letting go of clinging, then one of the things that happens therefore is that the energy body undoes, there is an undoing of a certain amount of contraction in the energy body. That's what happens, that's one of the things that happen when we look with an insight way of looking sustainably, deliberately. What also happens with an insight way of looking is the phenomenon itself begins to change. As I get skillful in a certain insight way of looking, the phenomenon that I'm looking at with this insight way of looking begins to fade. Here is this pain, it's very intense, I keep looking at it, just follow the example, I keep looking at it as not self, not me, not mine, it's just happening. And if I slowly do that, the pain, the unpleasantness starts to get less unpleasant, even more less unpleasant until it becomes neutral sensation. If I keep looking at it that way in the insight way of looking, actually the sensation begins to fade. There's no sensation there anymore, there's a space there for example. Maybe it even goes via some pleasant sensation, in other words what was unpleasant turns pleasant, then maybe turns neutral or the other way around, but eventually there will just be a space there, there will be the fading of that perception, fading of that phenomenon, the fading of that experience, appearance, phenomenon, perception. We say it's less fabricated because what's central to an insight way of looking is that it fabricates less, less dukkha, less self, less object. Whether we look at it like we're undoing contractions in the energy body or whether we say we're fabricating less solidity in the body, in the perception of the body, this insight way of looking does either of those, they're the same thing whichever way we're looking at it and PT will arise, PT will arise as a less fabricated perception or other genres. So an insight way of looking can open up the jhanic sense. Does this make sense? That was a very brief explanation. If insight ways of looking, I go back to what I said on the opening talk, what I mean by insight ways of looking is insight practices, and sorry for this, it sounds very, there's probably a word for it, but I mean insight practices, I describe them for instance in my book, seeing them freeze, so you might have done lots of insight retreats or whatever, you might have had insights into impermanence, whatever, I really mean something quite specific. If you're not familiar with all that, just leave all this, it's just an option that you can leave for another time. If you are familiar with it though, what you can do is take that, take one of those practices that you feel familiar with, one of these insight ways of looking and start using it, start using it and use it sustainably, just as sustainably as you would use the concentration on the breath or whatever, and what you will notice is as you engage this insight way of practice, the energy body starts to feel good for the reasons that I've just said. Either you can conceive it as it's getting its knots unnottered, it's getting uncontracted, or more accurately and sophisticatedly conceived, the whole bodily perception is being fabricated less. As you keep practicing the insight way of looking, the body starts to feel good, the energy body starts to feel good, has some kind, some kind, some flavour of wellbeing there. As the Buddha said, you don't snatch at that, so you're doing your insight way of looking, doing your insight way of looking in touch with the energy body, noticing how it feels, and then at a certain point, yeah, it's nice now. Then you don't just snatch at that nice feeling, the PT, or it could be a different flavour of nice feeling, but you keep doing your insight way of looking, letting the nice feeling build, noticing it as well, maybe then your attention is balanced between keeping doing the insight way of looking and the nice feeling, and at a certain point, just gently, you can manoeuvre your emphasis and attention so that the primary thing you're into, and the primary thing you're doing, is enjoying the wellbeing in the energy body, enjoying the PT. Is this making sense? So you may keep with the way of looking for a bit, but then at some point, if you're switching to samadhi practice, and if that's, again, samadhi is about the intention, that's what differentiates practice, it's the background intention. The samadhi intention has, I really want to get into this enjoyment, I really just want to absorb and bathe and enjoy to the max, that's a samadhi intention. So at some point, what really swivels is your intention there, and to focus on it, into maximising the enjoyment, getting really intimate with it, playing with those two modes of attention that we talked about yesterday, spreading it as well. These kinds of practices are immensely powerful, so they may take you well beyond PT, in fact, and well beyond the first jhana, they may take you into different, formless jhanas, the last four jhanas, formless jhanas. Where they take you is partly dependent on which insight way of looking you're practicing, is partly dependent on your previous experience. So if there's certain realms that you've visited a lot, you've kind of got a groove in the mind, and it might tend there, but it's partly dependent on which insight way of looking. So again, what is your playground? What is your learning edge playground? If your learning edge playground is the first, and you play with an insight way of looking, and it takes you into the fifth or sixth jhana, okay, that's maybe not what we want at this point, because you've decided that the first jhana or the third jhana, or whatever it is, is your playground, and that's shooting you way beyond it. But it might be that as you do the insight way of looking, as things fade, you can kind of pick up on the point where actually it's just well-being now, it hasn't overshot it into this huge empty space, or whatever it is. Okay, so that's one other possibility for a springboard or base practice, insight ways of looking. It's probably quite rare as a way of doing some art of it, so what? It might be your main thing. There's a second way I want to come back to using it, not so much as a main practice, and I'll come back to that a little later today. All right, second possibility, or group of possibilities I want to talk about today is a little bit more with the energy body, okay, so again, maybe Sabra's question, the energy body I would just view as a whole collection of possibilities, really, and I'm just throwing out a bunch of possibilities, I'd count it as one sort of base practice, yeah. But what I want to emphasize today is so far mostly we've done the energy body with the breath. The breath is something that kind of stimulates, opens, energizes, massages, shapes the energy body. What I want to do today a little bit is practice energy body without the breath, because that's also a possibility. So we could make that a separate category, you could just lump it into one, in a way just neither here nor there. So let's, I'll tell you what, let's play a game, a meditative game, so then I'll review at the end and you can write notes, so let's just take a few minutes to just play a little bit. Taking that time, it's so worth it, just take a little time and settle into the posture. And that posture has openness in it. So you need to be able to feel the openness in the posture. So what do you need to do, it might be a micro change in the posture, what do you need to do to actually feel it as open and to feel it as receptive and to feel it as soft. And at the same time the posture expresses, manifests, the chitta qualities, the heart qualities, the mind qualities of uprightness, wakefulness, alertness, resolve, energization. So there's this compliment there. Find a posture that expresses that coincidenta, this amalgam of opposites, coincidenti oppositorum. Find that. Settle into the posture, which really means not just settle down, but open out, open out the awareness. Settle out into the posture, fill out the posture with that awareness. Fill it out. And then opening the awareness to the space of the whole body, the whole body space, opening to the sense of the energy body, the feel of the energy body right now. It doesn't matter what your breath is doing, just opening, opening to that whole space, keep opening it. You're just there alive with the presence that's sensitive to the vibration, the texture, the feel, the energy, the tone, or tones of that whole space. Keep opening. It's not that you open further and further, it's that you open again and again, just a little bit bigger than the physical body. That whole space, the whole energy body filled with bright awareness, bright presence, bright sensitivity. See if you can turn up the brightness right now, the brightness of your attention. How does it feel? How does that whole space feel right now? Sometimes, sometimes, as we just open to that whole space, we begin to notice actually it's already a little bit pleasant, maybe it's a lot pleasant, maybe it's just a little bit pleasant. There's some well-being somewhere or lightly pervading the whole space. If that's the case, notice it, enjoy it, open to it. Not snatching just at that, let it fill the space if it can. Opening up the awareness to that space of the energy body again and again, and tuning to any sense of well-being or pleasantness that's there. Opening yourself to it, opening your body to it, feeling it. That was game number one. No problem if there wasn't pleasantness there, sometimes there might be. If there isn't, then it's just, and you're working with the energy body, it's just a matter of staying with it, noticing what is there, maybe introducing some breathing or the meta or whatever it is. Game number two has four little parts to it. Same thing, whole body awareness, stretch it out again, get so used to opening up again and again, you're going to do that a gazillion times in your life, again and again, open. Let that bright presence fill the whole space. And within that whole space, let two points, while you're still aware of the feeling, the tone of the whole space, let two points in particular become, if you like, more prominent or you're more kind of focusing on them with the whole space as well. So one point, let's say, somewhere in the middle of your head or the area where your head used to be, and another point, let's say, somewhere either down in the middle of the body around the solar plexus or even a little lower just below the belly button somewhere around there, and you've just got these two points. And simultaneously, you're kind of prioritizing a focus on both of them with the whole body. What does that do, this bi-focus, this double focus with the background attention to the whole body? What does it do if you imagine a line of energy or a line of light, say white golden light, between those two points with the whole body awareness included, but that becomes prominent, this line of energy connecting these two points? How does that feel? Okay, let that go. And again, stretching out the awareness again and again, fill that whole space with presence, with sensitivity. How about imagining three lines of energy? So these three lines meet somewhere in the lower belly, right in the middle of that kind of area. It really doesn't matter if your anatomy is not at all clear to you right now, it's fine if it isn't. Three lines of golden white light energy or just a kinesthetic imagination of energy, one of them goes from that point in the lower belly, right up the center of the body and out through the top of the head. Right out through the top of the head. And the other two go down, one goes down each leg and either out your knees or out your feet. The important thing is the kinesthetic imagination, it's fine if it helps to be visual as well, but really what does it feel like to imagine the lines of energy constituting, constellating the body, the body shaped around these lines of energy? How does that feel, what do you notice? Open the whole space, open the awareness to the whole space and within that, these three lines of energy. Okay, you can let that go. And again, opening up the awareness, stretching it over the whole body space, inhabiting, really filling that whole body space with this bright presence, bright awareness, bright attention. And now two lines, imagine two lines. Again one down the vertical center of the body and another perpendicular to it at right angles, 90 degrees, across it, across say perhaps the level of the, a little lower than the shoulders like where the nipples are. Roughly, it really doesn't have to be exact, it's not about that. Nor is it about seeing clearly what these lines of energy look like, it's just a way of shaping the energy. Just a light imagination, two lines there. Now you tell me, or rather don't tell me, but just see, what feels better? If these lines of energy go out of the body, out let's say through the bottom, through the perineum and out through the top of the head and out through the sides, or if they stay within the body. White, gold and lines of energy, but more important the kinesthetic sense, the kinesthetic imagination. Whole body awareness. What do you notice? Okay Doug, last one of this, let that go. Again whole body spreaded and imagine your energy body, your whole body in other words, that whole space, your energy body is a golden white, a cloud of golden white light. So its edges are not particularly defined, it's more cloud like. It's filled with this bright, bright luminous light, golden white. Again stretch out the awareness. How does that feel? What do you notice? You can let that go. The third little game or exercise is, again whole body, whole space, and if I say to you, imagine your body, imagine your whole body as radiant and empty, empty in the Dharma sense. Whatever that means to you, in other words whatever level of understanding you have of emptiness or what that means to you, just plug that in. Imagine your whole body as radiant and empty. Whole body awareness, whole space, your body radiant and empty, luminous but empty. Whatever that word means to you, Dharma clean. Okay, you can let that one go. Last one, just for fun. Same thing, whole body awareness, whole body space, whole energy body, filling out that space. This time we actually want to keep some sense of the shape of your body, of your anatomy. So you really want to stay, in this game you really want to stay sensitive to how that whole body space feels, like where you're sitting right now. But if I add this, can you, or invite you, just imagine an energy body, coloured blue, a lovely blue, in the shape of your body that flies out from your body. Flying, it can fly. You remain sensitive to everything you're feeling in that space, but imagine this lovely light, luminous light blue, sorry, luminous blue energy body flying out, and maybe it does these very free flying manoeuvres somewhere in front of your body. How does that feel in the energy body space? Does it loop the loops and what does it want to do, how does it feel? You have to really stay connected with the feeling in your space, your energy body space. When you're ready, connect it to your energy body space, you can open your eyes. What have we got here in this little group? We've got just a few little games, but really essentially what we're doing is going to the energy body experience, and sometimes, without doing anything with the breath or meta or anything else, we notice there's already some pleasantness there, and it might already be enough pleasantness to work with, enough to kind of coax and gather into PT and wellbeing and focus on it, don't need anything. What it also might be, we just play a little bit with the imagination and that starts to shape and fabricate the experience in certain ways. If it is already pleasant, etc., then maybe you can get into that. Definitely as you get more and more experienced, shall I run through what I did? The first one is just open to the energy body. Forget about your breath, forget about the matter, just open to the energy body, the whole space, see how it feels. Without putting any pressure on it, there might be more there already than you commonly realise. That's the first one. The second one is you're just really playing, again, with your imagination. It's primarily a kinesthetic imagination. If the visuals help it, great, but primarily it's kinesthetic, in other words, the inner tactile sense, energetic sense, of either two, well, as backtrack, no, sorry, what it actually started with was giving two points, two separate, spatially separate points within the energy body. It looks like your mind is paying attention to two things at once, predominantly and equally, rather than just one point. It's paying attention to two points. Sometimes, there's something that does, it just opens things up, and it can also allow things to become more stable, because again, there's more of a base, a wider base. We did that as well. Then there's also the possibility of, as I said, using the kinesthetic imagination, which may be helped by the visual imagination, and imagining certain lines of energy. Really you can just play with whatever, so it might be a vertical line, it might be this vertical line with lines going down the legs, it might be other lines intersecting in different ways, it might just be this slightly amorphous, luminous cloud of energy, but the imagination shapes the energy, and then that becomes an experience, and it's no longer an imagination before, I'm actually experiencing this thing, and for Samadhi, that can become useful. The other two are probably less common, but you can imagine your body is radiant and empty, I said, even if you're not quite sure what empty means, or you're using it as fairly fundamental. I don't know, when you tried that, was that interesting, isn't it? Is that a question, Andrew? It was what? Amazing. Partly this is the point, it's like, look, all this stuff is not necessarily so far away, you just do this little game for what we're doing, 30 seconds or something, and stuff starts to happen, and how much the whole thing is conditioned, the whole thing is fabricated, the experience of the body is fabricated by the mind, and that's fabricated by what I put in the mind, or what ideas, or what views, or what ways of looking, or what imagination, etc. Even when I don't quite know exactly what I'm talking about, or thinking, or what it means, there's a magic in all this, it can be. And how about the flying one, was that? Some people like that, okay, good. It's not to say, there is a whole other thing, which we really don't want to get into on this retreat, it's a whole other thing, but these are little stimuli, trigger practices, that's how I'm using this. To just get a sense of how sensitive a system the energy body is, and by energy body, I mean the experience, and it's so sensitive, it's so conditioned and fabricated by the littlest thing, by the smallest thing, by the subtlest thing. Okay, so basically what I'm saying is, you can either go to the energy body directly, and it might already be ready to work with, or you can play with the energy body in ways that don't really include meta or breath. But meta or breath, of course, will also shape the energy body. Okay, I've never taught a group Jhana retreat before, all the Jhana retreat teaching I did was one to one. And in the one to one interview, the person comes in and they report an experience, and out of everything from my experience and my teaching that I know about Jhanas, I just will select exactly what I feel they need right now to frame what just happened to them and give them the next thing to work on. And they take that away, and usually I see them either three days later or a week later or whatever it is. And then again, they come in with something and I'll give them a piece. And in that way, they don't get overwhelmed at all in terms of information overload, etc. When it comes to teaching a group retreat, I have to think differently, and I do actually almost every group, a little different for some retreats, but in these kinds of retreats, I think very differently. So I don't know, I remember being very young and being invited to birthday parties in the neighbourhood of the kids my age, and this must have been a very alien sort of ritual to both of my parents, but for me it just became a thing. So you would go home, you would get a birthday cake with the candles and all that, you would have a slice of birthday cake, and then when you went home, I don't know, do they have this in the States, and you get a going home present, which is usually another piece of cake. Is this familiar to anyone? Yeah. So I think of this as like there's a big slab of birthday cake that's going home present for you. And so I'm inviting you to think of it that way if you feel like, ahh, this is way too much, you know. I'm sitting here, this is how I have to think of it for me, I'm sitting here and I'm teaching to you now, I'm giving you something that I hope will be useful for you now, and certainly in interviews that's exactly what I'm doing, it's a one-to-one interview. But I'm also speaking to you, I'm also speaking to another you, the you that's alive and still wants to practice in a year's time, and another you, the you that's still alive and wants to practice Jhana's in five years time or ten years time. So I'm actually speaking to multiple you's, and between you, you can eat all that birthday cake. I'm without getting into gesture. I'm also, for me this is actually really important, I'm speaking to people who are not in this room. All this is, if Nathan's doing his job right, all this is being recorded. And I've been very conscious of that for years, so I feel like I'm speaking to people I will probably never meet. I'll never know them, I'll never even know that they listened. They may be somewhere for all kinds of reasons they're not able to come, it's not even just a matter of timing, maybe they can't afford to come on retreat, maybe they have a health situation that they can't do something like that, maybe they have a family or obligations or work, whatever it is. So when I, most of the group retreats I teach, I'm actually thinking of other people, that neither you nor I, or you might meet some of them, I might meet a few of them, but there's people that we will never meet, and they matter to me a lot, not more than you of course, but they matter to me a lot, especially the people who would not be able to come, and who are out there really nowadays with the Dharma and the internet, really in the middle of nowhere, and they have very little sangha and they have very little direct teacher access, and they can listen to this stuff on the way. So I'm also in a way speaking to you, your future selves and these people, maybe when you have more time, and when you can take more time with this material, when actually a little later on, however later on, actually things will make more sense, some things will make more sense, when you will actually be able to realise, because of what's come in between, partly I've understood emptiness more, or something else, you've done other practices or something in your conception has opened, or your practice has deepened, and actually you'll be able to realise more of the significance of some of the things that are being taught. You'll also maybe realise how it fits together, which sometimes it might just be, just, I don't know, that and this and what the hell's that got to do with the other Dharma I've heard, and emptiness and all the rest of it, and also maybe sometimes where you will literally hear things that you're not hearing now, you think, oh I was in the room when they said that and I've just heard it now, on the sixth time I'm listening or whatever. So it could be you in the future with your daily home practice, off retreat and just giving yourself a period of time when you're really getting into Jhana practice, it could be you in some time when you've decided to do a three year Jhana retreat, just on Jhana's, and why not if you want to, that would be a beautiful thing to do, and my hope is that the material in this retreat will serve you all through those three years, you basically have what you need, so that's how I'm thinking of it, and I know that some of you, I know that some of you it's no problem, I know that some of you are struggling with all this stuff, so that's the way I get my head around it, is open the view, open the view, time wise, people wise, etc. So, someone said to me, I don't know when it was, a year or two ago, you know, I hate it, I hate when you talk about sensitivity Rob, and that word subtle, it really winds me up, and with this person I think Pali was pushing on a self view that they had, that they weren't sensitive, and they couldn't be subtle, and all that stuff, but actually I'll come back to that, I'll come back to that in a second, let's get clear before I come back to that, let's get clear, what's the simplest big picture thing I need to be clear about, we talked about a bass practice or springboard practice, right, and the criterion where the most preferable criterion we're adopting for what should my bass or springboard practice be is whatever practice makes PT easiest to arise, and most reliably, that's it, so I choose my bass practice and I want whatever practice gives rise most reliably and most easily to PT, or let's not even say PT, to feeling good in this space, to the body feeling good, let's just actually say that, not even PT. So that's one large principle, just in terms of if you feel a bit lost, that's one large principle, second large principle in terms of the instructions, like a simple global take on the instructions, there's a bass practice, how do I choose that, second is this idea of a learning edge playground, and what is that? I want to find what my learning edge playground is and I want to marinate in it, I want to hang out there, that's the place where I spend 90% of my time, if I can, and that marinating includes working, playing, tweaking, it doesn't mean just kind of hanging out there, you know, in some kind of stupor or non-responsive, non-attuned, non-active playing way, right? So what's my learning edge playground, and I need to marinate in there, which includes working, playing, and tweaking, and I need to work, play, tweak until that learning, I have mastered all the, what do you call the thing in a playground, a slide, and all those, the collective word, equipment, all the equipment, and so I've mastered all the equipment, it's not a very romantic word, but until I've mastered all the equipment in that particular playground, so I want to marinate there and I want to master both of which take working, playing, tweaking. If as you're listening to this, you can already do A, B, C of what I listed of the mastery, and what's involved in mastery, you can't do D, whatever that is, then D is exactly what you need to be working and playing with and working on doing, that's where you want to fill out your sense of what mastery is there. If you can do all the elements of what's involved in mastery at a certain level, let's say with the first Jhana, whatever it is already, then either it should be the case that naturally, organically by that point, the second Jhana has already appeared, just naturally, inevitably, that's usually the case, it's already evolved to the next Jhana, for example, the second Jhana from the first. If it's not the case, if you've really got all the mastery down, it's still not the case, then it needs a little bit of wizardry, trickery, subtle little things you can try that just nudge it and encourage it to encourage that sapling, the sprout to come, the bud to unfold and show itself. So that's what you need to bring to interviews, or if not, we'll obviously get to it in the teachings. So when we talk about playground, it could be any Jhana, but your playground could also be still the base springboard practice. It doesn't matter, what matters is the big principle in orienting, understanding those basic principles. Does that make sense? So that's the big picture of orienting to these instructions. I started to say before, if very little of this energy business makes sense or this talk about sensitivity and subtlety, or perhaps like this person I was talking about just once, I really don't like all this talk about energy and attunement and subtlety and sensitivity. If that's the case, and if you're not even sure which base practice, which springboard practice actually feels best, then just choose one. Actually I don't think this is the case for anyone at this point in this room. Either that, well, I'll say it anyway, just choose one. For example, just choose the breath at the nostrils or in the abdomen. And if you don't like all this talk about sensitivity and energy and da-da-da, then just concentrate on that point. Concentrate on the feelings and sensations at that point. When the mind gets distracted, come back to it and concentrate on it again. And when the mind gets distracted again, return and concentrate. Without judging, without any to-do, just come back again and again and again, return a Google Plex time. You know what a Google Plex is? It's the biggest 10 to the 10 to the 10. Is that right, Peckham? What hundred? Anyway, it's a lot. It's really just over and over and over. It's a really basic instruction. Just do that, okay? To which we'll add two more pieces of instruction. One is when a hindrance arises, do not sit there putting up with it. Do something about it. From that list that we gave, just do something about the hindrance. Second piece of instruction, can I learn to refine my concentration a little bit, which means playing with those three things I said intensity, delicacy, and directionality. In other words, play with those. Learn to move the sliders up and down, turn the dials up and down. If you don't like any of this other stuff, just do that. Do that and trust in it and it will deliver its fruit. Okay. Maybe we'll cut there. Okay.

 Danny, yeah please. Yeah so expand a bit on these different words sensitivity, attunement, responsiveness and refinement. Yeah, yeah attunement, sensitivity, responsiveness, refinement. Okay so let's say, let's take the example we're talking with Jason. Here's meta and I'm practicing the meta and I'm noticing the different flavors emotionally and in the energy body at different times. Here's happiness, here's peace, here's something that I don't even have a word for but it just has a certain kind of emotional quality. So sensitivity is noticing all that and feeling it. Reaffiment is more just the idea that first of all these are probably quite subtle things. They're not big sort of in your face. I mean they can be but as the whole thing deepens things tend to get more refined meaning more subtle. Yeah, they're not big explosions necessarily and part of what I would want to include in pretty much all practices is that willingness to pay attention and ability to pay attention be sensitive to what is refined and also knowing the possibility that things can get more and more refined not necessarily more intense, though they can also get more intense. Responsiveness really is just the okay for instance again going back to Jason's so here I'm saying may you be happy then I say may you be peaceful and I notice that when I say may be peaceful is that oh may be happy was just it was okay nothing particularly happened but when I said may you be peaceful there was a little oh there was a little something there maybe it was a feeling of peace or something I actually felt that in the energy body and in the heart. So I'm sensitive to it, it's maybe quite refined and but I'm responding to it by noticing it and then maybe my response is let's just repeat that phrase a few times and then I'm riding the thermals like I said yeah. So that's my responsiveness for example but there's all kinds of responsiveness so even you know like a whole macro level responsiveness like I've been sitting, sitting, working with this hindrance and you know and it's just for a time for a cup of tea that's responsive you know it's like I'm making a responsive decision. So there's in terms of how gross or refined responsiveness it goes over the whole range. A tune man would be okay here's go back to the example here I've just said peaceful and there's that there's that energy or emotion feeling to it and I'm kind of listening to that and feeling it I'm kind of of everything that's going on I'm kind of singling in on that. I'm not losing the whole background of my whole body sense but I'm I'm tuning my receiver to that particular wavelength and I'm just kind of resonating with the vibe and feeling it yeah so that would be what attunement and as I do that like I said today the very very very activity of attuning amplifies that particular wavelength or tends to does that make sense? Yeah if you like organizing and partially organizing I mean it's it's the thing that you're kind of that that's what you're tuning to it's like when you tune a receiver it's like there's all this static or other radio stations you're just finding that one you're dialing there's that one I'm tuning it's literally like that I'm tuning to it and then it's like okay now I'm enjoying this radio station I'm really feeling it etc that so the feeling it the enjoying it is part of the attuning as well as the focusing on it's all part of the attuning does that yeah okay there's a couple here please. Yes absolutely so a subtle object what happens when an object gets subtle let's say the breath gets so it's very common on retreats people to to stay after a while the breath just gets I can't feel it anymore or they're paying attention the rise and forth I can't feel it anymore it's become a subtle object and in a way we could say yes it's inviting the attention to become more subtle but sometimes what happens it becomes so subtle and the we don't let the attention become correspondingly subtle and just I can't feel it and and then we space out or lose air we get frustrated or whatever that doesn't work or whatever but if what we can do is ah the object is getting more subtle great okay interesting and then and then what's the ah of just letting the attention get corraspous so it kind of matches the subtlety level of the object and that process again I would say that's more central to what's really going on as samadhi deepens this subtleizing if we make it a verb then something like I'm just I've been there for 1348 breaths or whatever it is that that process of subtleizing is what allows things to open up in a moment to moment level and on in a sitting but also if we look at the whole scale of what the jhanas are they are movements into more and more subtlety so that something like you know the nothingness the seventh jhana is incredibly subtle state and the neither perception or no perception it's it's unbelievably refined you know but even like the the the peacefulness of the third jhana is less subtle than the seventh and eighth is more subtle less subtle less subtle less subtle all the way back so the whole spectrum is actually a movement into more subtlety and understanding that has actually a lot to do with what's talking about perception attainments and the whole view of the thing but in a moment to moment meditative level yeah you want to you want to cut if the object gets more subtle it's like okay how can I just let the attention get more subtle how can I let it shake down like that or what do I need to do yeah okay lovely let's just take one more I can't even see who that is that Marco hi yeah shift to walking I think so yeah there's unfortunately there's a few different options here and I don't want to I will talk more about this but let me let's say something now again partly just dependent on what I know of your practice a little bit so it might be at this point that let's say you're sitting PT arises and then at some point pain arises somewhere in the body and then what what you can do is get more into the PT and kind of keep it a bay so I would really recommend that's the first thing you do it's almost like your priority is the PT and enjoying it and absorbing into it getting more into it sometimes what helps you do that is actually rather than concentrating on where there's PT that that's one option definitely but another option is and I will I'll give other options too but let's say for now is actually seeing if you can spread the PT into where into where there's pain does that make sense and so sometimes what was painful actually becomes pleasurable as as as you spread it more partly what maybe what you think what you're still working on is really learning the kind of absorption into the PT so we don't want to distract it too much by getting into the whole pain thing at this point so that's the primary thing but partly there's also there's again perception what was unpleasant can be perceived as pleasant it's something quite amazing so sometimes see if you can spread the the PT there just imagine it going there or just imagine even for someone you know you might be just just decide to see it as PT you know there's several things you can play with now I'll give more at some point at some point that might work sort of once or twice for some minutes and then and at some point you can't do it anymore okay on this retreat at this point that's the time to get up okay you're out of batteries and and it's time to get up and you have a cup of tea go for a walk or do some walking meditation or whatever yeah I mean if you want you could stand up and continue meditating and if that's pain-free you know so it's an option but how does that sound for now as a sort of part partial answer yeah and I think everyone can hear much just repeat it for the tape so um Mark is asking what is playing with the PT and in the ways that I've already said but sometimes remember from last retreat sometimes he sat with the real firm resolve I did I did Tana sit through the pain be there it was difficult but then when he came back after taking a break after the sitting then that's when the most PT built up it broke through yeah so it makes him think now well maybe I should do that for the sake of that PT breaking through later yes yeah um partly was wanting to talk about maybe even starting tomorrow so PT arises two ways and one one is this kind of just keep showing up with intensity and working working and it kind of erupts through and the other way is no here's a little bit of PT and we're coaxing it we're building it we're adding to it more so they're just different ways of working really but I'm partly wanting to ask you what were you doing in those times when you were really just with your firm resolve what actually were you doing with the mind at that point because you could sit with pain and actually just end up a contracted miserable crumple mess you know if the relationship is wrong with it so you were you were probably doing something you must have been in some mode of way of looking or relationship with that that then that was part of the effect wasn't the resolve will build energy and energy is related to PT so it can erupt that way but there was also there need to be other factors there as well that have to do with the way of looking and relating so do you remember what they were yeah very good so it's a market when I asked him that market says it's a combination of the allowing letting be practice insight way of looking and the annata not self practice both of which I would regard as insight ways of looking and what they do is when you're doing those so you're not just building adhitana and energy by staying still you're actually opening opening the energy body and opening and letting go of clinging and that's having a big effect as well when I say openness of heart openness of being I also mean just openness of from you know release of clinging so all this PT also comes from release of clinging so but a lot of factors a lot of things need to come together for the moment of PT to arise so but can you see how those that would be significant yeah because if you'd sat there just grinning your teeth and gritting and you know it wouldn't have given rise to PT later does it make sense so as to what to do in your case here do both I don't think it matters but but again know what your playground is in terms of what exactly you trying to achieve at this point what you trying to learn what you trying to gain mastery of and that might be I'm not sure but it might be really absorbing into the first jhana you know and so if that is that what do I need to do how do I need to relate right now and practice right now if but I have a sense that's what I'm trying to that's my playground does that make sense yeah does that sound relevant yeah okay super I think we probably need to stop now let's is that is that question Monica oh let's let's have some quiet together

 Okay, so I would like to talk now about effort and achievement, attitude and view. And a lot of what I'm going to say will keep its relevance, should be applicable whatever level you're at, whatever stage of development you are through the jhanas. As I said, the effort thing never goes away, it just becomes more subtle. But the attitude thing and the whole view, all this is so important. And so it should apply to, maybe not all of it, a lot of it should apply to any level we're talking about. I meant to say this the other night, but I'll throw it in now. It's interesting to look up the word samadhi in a Pali dictionary and then a Sanskrit dictionary, because actually a Sanskrit word, and see some of its kind of historical uses. So samadhi almost always gets translated as concentration. And I hope you can sense right now, I feel, yes, a great translation. And there are some problems that come with that translation, a kind of implicit and then repeated and then entrenched indoctrination that comes. We tend to think of it as meaning something, right? You've got that message a little bit. If you look up what the word means, it actually means agreement or like a reconciliation, like a group of people agree on something or two people become reconciled or harmony, like harmony in a village or something like that. That's one of its principle meanings. What does that imply about that word? What does it imply about your view? What does it imply about your conception? What does it imply about what you emphasize? So I'm not going to say anything about it, but again, this is the invitation, the reminder to listen on your toes. So effort, it's a constant question. We can talk about it at a very gross level, we can talk about it at a kind of macro level and micro level, we can talk about it at extremely subtle levels. Effort and attitude and view, I want to go into some of this. Sometimes what happens, often what happens when a person loves the path and loves practice and really has a good desire and an eros for all this stuff, in the course of a retreat, in the course of practice, very easy that we put too much pressure on, too much pressure on the practice, too much pressure on ourselves. Sometimes there are people who would do better with a bit more pressure. They're just a bit like, it's cool, things come and go and whatever, it's not, whatever. I actually could do with turning the heat up a little bit, working harder, more time on the cushion, et cetera. I don't know, most, very common, especially in this kind of retreat, is somewhere along the line it gets a bit too pressured. We put too much pressure on, and that's unconscious. So how can we take pressure off if that's the case in different ways? One of the things I just want to reiterate, body needs to be relatively comfortable, certainly at this point in your journey in Jhana practice for most of you. We don't want to put too much pressure on the body by thinking it's better to stay, cross-legged is better, and I need to be in that over and over for hours and hours and sit through the pain, et cetera. As I mentioned, the first, I don't know how many years of my Vipassana practice were mostly spent looking, being with, tolerating, working with, as best as I could, physical pain. It's sitting after sitting, hour after hour, month and year after year of retreat, et cetera. I would say that developed a lot. I mean, I look back at that youngster and I think, you know, there's quite something to just put up with all that and be willing to do all that. A lot got developed in terms of patience and will and resolve, and I'm not sure how much insight, some insight, but I wouldn't say that was the primary thing. At one point, my teacher Narayan, I can't remember the context, I'm telling her this or we were discussing retreat I was going or something, and she said, you know, it's great and it's great that you're able to do that, but your practice might be getting a little narrow because if you ask me what about, you know, the exploration of emotions and all kinds of other stuff or samadhi or this, it was mostly just being with the pain. And as I mentioned, Christina suggests, why don't you try alternating postures? And then it was at that point that something opened. The pressure was taken off the body and the samadhi could really, really then develop. So pressure off the body. Another way is through the view of what we're doing and the idea of what we're doing. And this is so much of what I want to talk about. So sometimes, of course, I'm not John retreat, I'm going to I want to develop the John. I want to develop my concentration, etc. Sometimes we have to reflect or maybe oftentimes we have to reflect on the bigger picture of what we're developing here. I mean, what you are developing just by trying, for instance, to keep your attention at the tip of your nose. Then we are failing because I got distracted in thought again is is a view and then a whole emotion and papa and dukkha that's coming out of too narrow a view of what you're trying to develop. So as I said, if I include the fact that the hindrances and they're arising have all kinds of potential for insight there, that's part of my enlarges the scope of my view, my picture of what I'm trying to do. That makes a huge difference. And when when they're there, I'm not going to I'm not all upset, it's not a failure. I don't judge myself as a failure as a meditator or whatever. I'm developing sensitivity and all this. And maybe that's more important than focus and concentration. I'm developing all these resources, as we said, and a lot of this is not black and white. So sometimes another problem with view we have is everything so black and white. Obviously where is the black and white in terms of resources that one's developing of well-being or patience or whatever it is? I am developing concentration, but even that's not black and white. Patience, as I said, resolve, responsiveness, discipline, all this is in the big picture of what's being developed. And when it's not going well in terms of how well I'm sticking to these sensations, I need to open that view or at the beginning of sitting. I really need to have a sense of the bigger picture of what I'm doing, what's being developed here. This makes a big difference. I'm of course developing mindfulness. Every time the mind wanders off, it's mindfulness that notices that the mind is wandered off. So it's a moment of mindfulness and I have to see that. That's also part of what I'm developing. Let the view get too narrow because like we said with the table analogy, with the only one, too narrow is not enough base and things will capsize very, very easily. The wind blows a little bit, things get a little difficult and we get very dejected that something falls over. Hopefully I'm also developing or I'm over time letting go of judgments. Every time the mind wanders, I judge less and not only am I developing concentration, but maybe I'm developing, I'm taking care of working on that too just as a sort of integral woven in factor. All of these things are really, really important and for some people, they're going to be the development of patience, the letting go of self-judgment, the development of discipline, the development of resolve. All this is actually going to be more important, more significant for your liberation, the healing of your heart and your life than attaining some jhana. I really mean this. Some people it's like, yeah, jhana, great, but what about this? What about that self-judgment? What about whatever it is? I mentioned yesterday this kind of micro habit. Remember this kind of like, oh, it's not quite as good as it was yesterday, it could be better. That's also in the bigger picture of what's being developed, the influence of that kind of subtle micro level aversion or negative viewing. The influence of that on our lives is huge. If that's part of our bigger picture of what we're developing, that also expands the container of what we're doing, the view of what we're doing and hence the stability of our vessel. One more thing about that micro habit. Can I learn to let go of that micro habit of it's not good enough and still work and play in the moment? They're not contradictions. How can we have a direction that we're working or playing towards and yet not have that negative, not quite good enough or not let that kind of run the show, cast its color and its flavor over the whole of the proceedings? When is that a hindrance and a chilesa? It could be better. When is that a hindrance and when is it actually just a wise discernment that's actually part of this opportunism? When is letting go of this, it could be better. When is that a skillful shift in attitude and when is it just laziness and inertia? That's okay. We've actually just got putting up with something but it's coming out of laziness and inertia. This is a really subtle question, really subtle inquiry. Doing a Jhana retreat or practicing Jhana long term, developing that, it's going to really develop our steadiness, our capacity to stay steady long term with whatever we're committed to, whatever we care deeply about in life, the projects we want to see through, the service we want to give because we have more capacity, more resource. We're also training this moment to moment steadiness of course but it takes a lot of steadiness to just keep showing up and keep intending to do samadhi practice. The steadiness you need to show up and to keep putting your mind in a certain direction, you're actually cultivating the kind of steadiness it takes to be there for your long term intentions and stay steady with them and your goals and projects and what you really care about and manifesting in your life in a way that works towards that. That capacity for steadiness is certainly a result of Jhana but it's also a cause. It's part of the causal supporting conditions. All that's involved and all that I think needs to be in the bigger picture because if the picture gets too small, we'll get miserable much more often and self-judgmental and tight and everything. Okay, so talking about taking the pressure off, sometimes at the beginnings of sitting is a quite interesting moment. Sometimes of course you get right and get right to work, get right to play, just okay, let's go. Because sometimes you can come in and just hang out for a while, just sit there and there's sort of light mindfulness and really what you're doing is just relaxing, hanging out, just checking that you're not too tight about the whole thing. Sometimes for some people or for dedicated minutes, just adopting the posture automatically brings in a whole set of views and a whole bunch of tightness. It's just associated with coming into a meditation hall or sitting on a cushion in a certain posture and we bring all this kind of sometimes subtle, sometimes less than subtle psychological baggage with it. So at the beginning, sometimes it can be fruitful, just hang out, relax, look around, taking the pressure off and sometimes in that the energy body is actually allowed to become more harmonious, just naturally, organically to some extent because the pressure, oftentimes unconscious pressure that we bring is actually squeezing the energy body in a certain way that's not helpful. And again I mentioned this on the opening, I think sometimes open the intention, why am I here? It gets so much about me and my practice and my achievement and my and then me compared to someone else and all the rest of it. And I actually keep opening it up so I'm actually not doing this just for myself. Maybe I'm not doing primarily for myself. This kind of thing can be very, very significant, very pivotal in terms of its effects. And again if I come up with a 3 week or whatever, it's a 23 day Jhana retreat, whatever it is, or I've got a week retreat or I've got a month or I've got a year or whatever it is and then we can sometimes often consciously and sometimes semi-consciously kind of have a timetable of achievement. So I guess by the end of the second week I'll be in there and then if it's a year then you really go three months or whatever it is. Timetables are really not helpful in this. What they help is suffering. So if you want to suffer, give yourself a timetable of achievement of what you hope to achieve when or what you're pretty sure you're going to achieve when or even what you're intending to achieve when. It's a form of hindrance in a way actually. Let it go and work and play, work or play whatever you prefer. So what is it to work? To work towards it? So often what happens in some spiritual context is there's so much pain in the idea of a goal or achievement or attaining this or that or whatever. It's so painful especially for Westerners etc. Just throw it out and then we get a teaching of nowhere to go, nothing to do, da da da da da. And it's either this or that. Our life is not like that. There are places to go in our life. There is stuff to do. There's stuff that we care about. We need to have goals. We need to do stuff. We need to make stuff happen. It matters to our souls. How do I do that? How do I relate to working towards what I love, what I feel is important, playing in that way and still not having a timetable for example, letting go of that. I don't have to get tight around it or it's an art to have a goal and work towards a goal and be aware of where the tightness comes in. Maybe that's a better way of saying it will come in if you love this stuff. You will suffer. You're going to suffer on this retreat with exactly that if you care enough. If you don't care, you probably won't suffer. But if you care, you're going to suffer. The Buddha talked about this. It's the distress of the contemplative he calls it. If you're not, something is wrong. Something I would say is wrong in your larger view and your attitude. So it will come and part of the R is, ah, there it is. And noticing even at really subtle levels, what's feeding it, what view is feeding it, what way of going about things is feeding it. It's part of the art. And related to that, again, this achievement thing, is this it? Have I got it? Is this the first Jhana? Am I in it? Have I achieved it? Have I got it? And that's of course related to this question that I've talked about several times. What qualifies as a Jhana? Have I got it? Is this it? Depends on how I define it, right? So again, oftentimes this question of what actually qualifies as the first Jhana, what qualifies as the whichever Jhana, what qualifies as Jhana, it's often, I'll just dial down my inner language here. It could often be posed in more intelligent ways, I think. It could often be posed in more fruitful ways. Because it's not, it's, what is important? What's important? Don't lose sight. Let your questions and let your emphases and let your attitudes and let your practices and everything comes from what is important. What do I want? Where am I actually trying to get to? And it's interesting, you know, if you think about, so there's such a, you know, tension and tizzy and fuss around what is and what isn't a Jhana, either internally for a person or, you know, in terms of polemic and argument and all that stuff. If you think about, I don't know, something like mindfulness or another factor on the eightfold path, do we have the same kind of fuss about that? Or the seven factors of awakening or most people with all those other stuff, what is mindfulness? Is this mindfulness? Is it not mindfulness? Was that a moment? It doesn't, it's not so black and white. Or meta is even better example, because we were talking about it before. Yes, it's, we have to acknowledge, it's helpful to define meta. What are we talking about? We're not talking about like, if you don't love me back, I'm going to jump out the window. It's not meta. It's, so it's good. Okay, meta is, it's this, it's unconditional. It's non-attached. It's universal. This, this is good, you know, wishing for well-being. It's good to define what meta is. But the practice of meta, you know, sometimes it's stronger. Sometimes it's weaker, as we were just saying, has all kinds of sub sub emotions or flavors. It's a complex of lots of differences. Sometimes there's no emotion there. It's just an intention. All that's meta, you know, sometimes it's at different times, it's more or less purified of its near enemy, attached love, right? It's a spectrum and all of that is included. All of it counts as meta, right? Who would, it should. Why are we thinking about Jhana, first Jhana, third, whatever it is, is something in any way different? Why has that one, what's going on? So somehow, so tenaciously and unquestioningly, we conceiving of Jhana as something different, like this one word has got so charged and as I say, I just put this question, is it possible to think and relate to all this stuff with a little more intelligence? Let's just say that. So yes, you know, sometimes it's better to just drop that question if one's fretting about it and the fretting can be completely non-verbal. I'll come back to this at the end. I'm fretting over am I in or out and I'm not even thinking am I in or out. Just get into it. Just enjoy it. Don't work or play or seek to maximize your enjoyment. So again, with respect to view and attitude and emphasis and all that, did I say yes to quality over quantity? I did say that, right? So oftentimes, mostly I would say it helps to prioritize the quality of attention over the quantity of attention, meaning how long in time before I get distracted. It's still important, you know, that's sustaining the attention or holding on something, but I would say most people do much better putting that secondary in importance to the quality. And what do you mean by quality? Wholeheartedness is part of quality. How wholeheartedly in this moment can I open to and give and become intimate with and become interested in and give myself to whatever it is I'm paying attention to. And this is one of those things. Okay, so it's really important in a micro level here. It's also really important in life. And it's not like, you know, the capacity, the ability, the willingness to be wholehearted. Sometimes that's what's missing in a person, not just in their concentration practice, but in their life as well. It's an important thing. Can I, how wholehearted can I be in this moment with this thing, with this person, with this, whatever it is, with this passion, with this issue, with this whatever. So quality means wholeheartedness, but also some of the things we talked about yesterday, this modulation of intensity. So quality doesn't just mean intensity on 11 all the time. It means the responsive sort of responsive tuning of the intensity of the attention. And if you, I'm actually not sure I know what that means, intensity, or I can feel what that means. There's something I would encourage you to experiment with. Play with it. Get a sense of shifting the gears or turning the dial up and down of the intensity of the attention. Because again, back to this issue of inertia. Sometimes I'm paying attention. I'm paying attention. I'm paying, what's the, I'm just paying attention. Okay, there's nothing to talk about. I'm paying attention. Are you with your breath? I'm paying attention to my breath. But the inertia there is not taking the trouble to actually play with this, get a sense of the, oh, this is what it is to be, this is what it feels like for an intense attention. This is what it feels like to back off the intention. And sometimes we just haven't explored that because there's a certain amount of inertia. We just think of attention, mindfulness, whatever it is. So delicacy, lightness of attention. This is all related. We talked about it yesterday. The relative spaciousness also is part of the quality. What kind of spaciousness of attention helps? So back to when we talked about PT earlier today, you know, which mode? This is all part of the quality, being willing to play with the relative spaciousness of the attention. Just to throw out a little bit, sometimes at some points there's really a place, I've talked still about quality of attention, there's really a place for a kind of poetic or even imaginal sensibility in relation to whatever it is I'm paying attention to, the breath, for example. So sometimes we tend to, most beginners on most retreats tend to pay attention to the sensations, the bare sensations, don't imagine, don't think anything, etc. And when we introduce the energy body, then we say it's okay to imagine and it's not really about sensation. It's kind of sensation, it's a different kind of sensation. But actually, what about if it's neither just sensation nor just energy? What would it be sometimes on this kind of retreat, it's like adding a spice to the meal. What is it to breathe the breath of the all merciful? Allah. What is it to breathe God's breath? Now I just have that view lightly in relation to the breath, what happens? Now of course that might not work for you at all, there's no formula here. The point is about there's ways of sensing whatever it is you're sensing, whatever it is you're concentrating on and sensing it with more poetic or imaginal sensibility. The breath of the beloved, the breath of the divine, the breath of the Buddha nature, these are just examples. Or the breath tinged somehow breathing mercy and breathing in and out compassion, whatever it is. It may be in that, for some of you that know the imaginal practice, I'm not going to explain it, it may be that the whole sense of self at that point becomes imaginal. That may be okay. Again, we're back to intention. What's my primary intention here on this retreat? We don't really want to get into a whole imaginal thing, etc. But it's almost like titrating how much of that imaginal sense or poetic sensibility there is in the mix of what's going on. Just a little bit of this spice in. It can ignite something. This is a hum drum, nothing's really happening. A little bit of that can change the whole relationship. Why? Go back to what I said before. What's most primary in PT arising? Open heartedness. Openness of being. That's actually kind of what makes the most difference. Years ago, Kirsten and I went to visit, we had a friend who's a scholar in Berlin, and he gave me, I was learning Sanskrit from him, he gave me these texts from caves in Afghanistan, Buddhist caves in Afghanistan in Sanskrit. And they were versions of the Anapanasati Suttur, the Buddha's mindfulness of breathing. But they had all kinds of things like, imagine breathing a blue breath or with color and imagery in them. I lost them, unfortunately. They weren't the originals. Anyway, that sort of thing is in the tradition. So a little bit of this titrate, a little bit of drop of this essential oil or whatever is can spark something, a dash of spice in the meal. But it's all very delicate, very subtle. So sometimes when people talk about like Tonglen, breathing in and out compassion, sometimes when people practice that way, it's all very heavy, it's all very clunky and kind of gross. So I'm talking about something much, much more subtle here. It's really like a little drop of something into a mixture. Okay, back to this. I probably won't bash it much after this talk. But again, so easily we come from our past, from our indoctrination to think of what are we doing here? Are developing our focus, developing our concentration or somehow trying to be or get into a state where there isn't thought? And then we measure the whole thing with how long have I been on this object? How much is thought arising and etc. Could that view be part of our inertia? Could we have inertia around that view? And as I said, some of those things that get emphasized are actually if you look at the whole totality of what the Buddha said about all this, they're just a phrase here and there. Somehow they've got extracted, repeated, emphasized, indoctrinated. What would it be to emphasize at times or instead or even primarily this idea of actually seeking to cultivate and to maximize even pleasure and enjoyment? The exploration of subtlety, exploration of the whole territories anyway, just exploration and love of exploration, love of what opens. What would it be if those were the primary intentions and emphases rather than focus, concentration, being thought free, etc. So earlier I said, I think I said some people might be really good to drop the whole jhana. If you've done, depends on how much experience you have, but some people at some point in their practice might be really good to drop the whole jhana framework, the whole framework of ideas of jhanas for a while. Actually maybe just think about insight practice and samadhi practice. The intention with samadhi practice is not so much focus and concentration, but as I said, this well-being, cultivation of well-being, pleasure, enjoyment, go back to what does samadhi mean? Harmonization, agreement, reconciliation. What does that suggest? What does it feel like? In dropping the whole jhana framework, we're also dropping this question of, or it's much less, is this it now? Have I got it? Sometimes what that does, that question, is it creates a kind of subtle overexcitement in the moment or a grasping or a snatching. The Buddha actually says in the suttas when he describes the jhanas, don't snatch without snatching at the first jhana, without snatching at the PT. But the snatching comes out of a certain attitude, a certain view, out of a certain mind state. It's something that happens in the moment that comes out of a view. You see how important view is. In dropping all that system of the jhanas, we're actually less self-judgment because the self doesn't have this whole scale, this ladder by which to kind of grade itself of measurement and the whole achievement mentality. A lot of these views will actually just work against the samadhi deepening and against the jhana kind of coming together or opening. Sometimes for some people at certain stages of their practice, they should just drop the whole framework of eight jhanas and just think of, split it in two. There's insight practice and there's samadhi practice. It's about having a really good time. Actually insight is as well the way I teach it, so it's just slightly different how you go about it. I'll explain the difference. In insight practice, it should be really nice. It should open up a really nice time. Because in insight practice, what we're doing is we're letting go of clinging in the moment. That's clinging that causes dukkha. An insight way of looking in my definition is something that releases clinging. It therefore should bring relief, release, and it feels nice. What we're primarily interested then when we're doing insight practice is that whole process. Where's the clinging? How do I let go of it? What ways of looking work to let go of clinging? What happens in my sense of self-world dukkha reality when I let go of the clinging? It's definitely a good time, but it's a certain kind of good time. Samadhi practice is more about, here's this lovely quality that's arisen. There can be many different ones. Let me really, as I said, nuzzle into it or open myself into it. Let me really get into that. I'm less concerned with these other questions primarily about clinging and reality and all that. They're both... You understand? It should be nice. If a person lets go of the Jana framework for a while, and then they can begin to notice gradually the different shades in their experience. Just thinking about Samadhi and these lovely qualities and enjoying them, slowly, slowly I begin to discern between these different shades and qualities and frequencies. Then at some point you can reintroduce the Jana framework in relation to that with Post-it Notes. Other people, as I said, really need to discern more. It's really the time in their practice where they need to make more discriminations, more discernments between this is this kind of pleasure, this is this kind of realm, and this is this. How is it different? What are the different territories? What are the sub-territories there? Let's go back to this thing. What's my playground? What does it mean to develop mastery? If we don't discern with all these territories, the fruit we get out of it will be much, much less. I know meditators who can get well-being and they can sit in that well-being for hours, actually. They've been sitting in the same well-being for about 20 years, I mean not without interrupting, but 20 years of their practice because they didn't want to discern when they could have discerned when it first came up between, say, PT and happiness or the different shades of happiness. What happened was it just became kind of like over time, all these qualities got mixed together. It was a nice soup, but it was just a soup. Here at Guy House for years, I don't know if it was in your time as a coordinator, but they used to have leftover soups. So basically, all the leftover lunches at the end of the week would get mixed into a pot, heated up, and that would be... and of course it didn't taste of anything, it just tasted of nothing really. People would still be very appreciative, but it was nice, but it's not like you could differentiate any flavors in there. If we don't discriminate, the real danger is you're just left with a soup of niceness that actually never really develops. It never really develops and brings the liberation and the opening of certain territories. So again, I contradict myself. People have different needs at different times. With regard to effort as well, in relation to everything we're saying, sometimes less effort is more productive in a moment. Actually backing off, that's kind of implicit in a lot of what I've said. Sometimes even a slight over-effort can disturb things in different ways. Sometimes that disturbance can be extremely gross, in fact, when the effort is too much. We'll maybe talk about that sometime soon. Sometimes the disturbance can be just really, really subtle, but over-effort has an impact. So if we go back to this analogy of a potter crafting vase or a pot on a wheel. So sometimes with the hands, you're going to press with more pressure and sometimes with less pressure. That's what's appropriate to what I'm trying to shape right then. In a way, the hands are always pressing. So if the hands on the clay are there, it's the analogy of attention. The attention is always there, but how it's pressing affects what arises. How much pressure affects the shape that's created. And that's responsive and it's variable and it's improvised. It might also be that the, again, stretching the analogy a little bit, the size. You could have my whole span of my hands shaping this big vase or this particular area where it curves and I've got it like that. Or maybe there's a certain area where I just want a little kind of place where it narrows and I just put my fingers there and that's going to do something. So again, the size, the pressure, all of this, it's going to shape what arises and all of it's improvised, responsive, sensitive variable. The Buddha gives several images. He talks a lot about right effort, balanced effort and you probably know these similes, but I'm mentioning it again. He talks about trying to hold a quail, which is a very small bird, and holding that in your hands. Too loose, it flies away. Too tight and you're going to crush it. Or another analogy is he gave to a musician, a lute player, and he said, you know, it's like tuning the strings too tight, you snap the string, too loose, you can't play anything. You can't, but it's going to sound not very good. So there's always this question, and it's not a fight, I've said this before, it's always a kind of sensitive, responsive question, what's the effort? But if we talk about effort, as I mentioned a while ago, we can talk about a kind of micro level of effort, which means in this moment, what does the intensity need? What does the delicacy need? But also the views in this moment. So I'm going to talk about view, think it's up here. What I really want to communicate is that whatever view you have up here, about the big picture of practice and where you're going, it inevitably filters down or its implications filter down to your micro moment to moment decisions in practice and navigations and what you do. You cannot get when you have, you know, we want to see this and understand this and understand the power of views. So part of the micro level effort thing is also the sensitivity and the playing with what view am I having right now about what I'm doing, what I'm emphasizing, etc. My attitudes. And there's a macro level, the question of effort on a macro level. So that means like, do I get up and just go for a walk now? Is it enough? Do I need a rest? How many hours a day am I engaging in formal practice? Is it too much? Am I squeezing too much? Or actually is it like I could do more? You know, the halls open really, really 24 seven and the walking room as well. Sometimes we might have like everyone else is on, you know, breakfast wash up and you could do a number of things there, but you could come and either sit or walk. So it's really sometimes we just get into I'm used to being on retreat and I sit this much and actually it might be more. So this whole macro level of effort, you know, do I need to back off? Do I need to do more? And again, the larger views as part of the macro level as well. I mentioned in part of my sort of description or definition of what mastery involved, I mentioned that it also involves at certain point, it involves being able to walk around in a genre or practicing doing that. So this is an interesting one because if you get to that point or when you get to that point, you say, okay, I'm going to do that. And you might walk around and go for whatever it is, 20 minute walk or whatever it is. When you're in the genre or an hour walk and it felt like, wow, that was great. I was really there and I was really in this whichever state of well-being it was and right with the energy body. And that was where my primary focus was and the feet were able to just find their way. And then you come back with the subtle view, this sitting is going to be amazing now. And it might be, it might really, no, I'm not speaking so much about careful of that. That's what you usually on insight retreats, careful of that. I'm not speaking so much about that. I'm speaking just about we don't always know because it's an energy question. So it might be, it might indeed, the fact that you've been in genre might really take your, you know, put you in a different kind of springboard for the next sitting or walking, a formal walking period. But it also might be that having done that actually takes a lot of energy. And then you come and actually realize, oh, I'm a bit tired now. Well, the mind doesn't quite have the energy. So these are, it's still really worth experimenting with, you know, when you get to that point, being able to do that and practice that. But it's an interesting thing. So effort, energy, genres bring energy unquestionably, but they also take energy. It's a lot of work. You're putting in a lot of work just again and again and again, working in these ways, playing in these ways. So that's part of the whole art of being on retreat and part of the whole art of practice is kind of getting, getting a little bit wise and sensitive to energy levels. And it's not always possible to predict it in advance, you know, when there's going to be a dip or when now I'm actually tired from the work I've done and I need to rest. But sometimes the mind will need to rest. It really needs to rest from these, these kind of efforts. Another interesting thing, and again, this is perhaps something that will, you will run into after you have, or once you've had quite a bit of experience with different genres. It's possible you're in a genre and then you lose it a little bit or you space out just for a couple of moments or something, a few moments. And then you bring the mind back and then bringing it back after you're a couple of moments of spacing out, it comes back at a deeper level. That's interesting. Two, two, I would say two conclusions or ponderings to take from that. One is, yeah, maybe spacing out is always not necessarily a disaster, you know. So if I'm too quick with the self judgment, it's over, hold on, let's see, let's see. Don't immediately assume that. The second thing to wonder about is that if the very fact, if that happens, might it be an indication that I was without realizing it just subtly over-efforting in the first place? And when I spaced out, actually what happened is I just loosened, the effort got loosened and it was that that allowed the deepening. I don't know, but to me that's very worth thinking about. So it might be an indication, and that should tell me something. Okay, well let's maybe try going back in and having a little bit more looseness for a while in terms of the effort, a little bit less on the effort pedal. And again, this probably applies more to once you have had different experiences with Jono, but it might also apply to working with energy body experiences. Sometimes what can creep in is we come to expect to be able to access this or that experience or Jhana or quality of energy. And in a way, that's actually, it's good, it's fine and good that we can expect that. And that's part of practice maturing, that one can go and have a reasonable expectation of this or that arising and being able to get into that. But easily that expectation can then become a kind of subtle, subtle demand for this or that to arise or to be as good as it usually is or how it was yesterday. And there's a subtle stance. It might not involve any thought, but it's just a subtle kind of demand or stance there. And again, just a slight, again, subtle shift of view. Rather than that, is it, again, why don't we think about picking up on, noticing, becoming sensitive to and then attuning to whatever frequencies are there in the mix, in the mix of the energy body, of the emotional, of the lovely stuff that's there. And that's different, so it might be a slightly different mix, but the question is, what is there and what can I attune to rather than a demand? The very tuning to frequencies in the energy body mix, the very tuning to frequencies in the mix of the chitta will amplify the frequency. So I have to notice it, which takes the sensitivity. I have to be willing to tune on it. That's the responsiveness. And then I have to attune to it. And the attuning will amplify. And that's a different thing. I'm not demanding. I'm seeing what's here, what's possible here, what actually is here, and then attuning. That's different than demanding something. That demand can, as I said, be very, very subtle. Okay. So going back to what I said about PT, which actually also applies to certainly for different factors of the primary factors in the first four jhanas even. Actually no, all the jhanas perhaps. In the meditation, part of the work and play that we talked about, part of this kind of direction of increasing, maximizing pleasure, licking the honey out of the cup or whatever it was, you could say, in soul making terms, I'm just throwing this out very briefly, it doesn't matter if you're not familiar with this, there's actually an eros for that quality, but it's eros in the small definition. It's this wanting more contact, wanting more intimacy, wanting to penetrate, wanting to open. For those of you who know the somi, you recognize that it's eros, but it's eros in the small definition because we're not at that point letting it go into too much of an image or a whole big where it expands, a psychologos and everything, but it's eros in the small definition. Inside the meditation, you can have eros with the fantasy, with the image, et cetera, eros in the bigger definition, i.e. eros that is allowed to stimulate psyche and logos and the whole soul making dynamic. If that doesn't make any sense, forget it, but it doesn't matter. What matters is right now, okay, for the moment to moment meditation, it's the seeking of the pleasure, the enjoying it, the getting into it, get into it. In the larger outside of the meditation and actually in the meditation both, the view of the self on the path is absolutely crucial. What's my view of myself as a practitioner, as someone walking the path? So I've known people with all kinds of actually deep experiences in meditation over the years, and something's not right in the view of the self on the path, the view of self as practitioner, and there's very little liberation that comes from it. The whole way there, the psychology is construing or holding the self as meditator, and this experience, that experience, understand the idea about emptiness, have even had certain fading, et cetera, something's not working. That connection is kind of jammed the wrong way. Sometimes in relation to Jhana, sometimes I don't know if I've said this in a talk before, sometimes I've certainly said it in certain interviews. Again we can get so much tight around the achievement oriented and then self judging. One way, kind of take the pressure off, and I'll say something opposite, one way of taking the pressure off is, okay, what we're doing here is with the Jhana's business and the PT and the pleasure and all these different wavelengths of pleasure, is something akin to okay, you're tired and your back hurts, and at home or wherever you are there's a sofa and it's got lots of cushions on it, and you're just kind of arranging these cushions so that they feel as best as they can feel. Oh no, if I shift this one, that's better, that's better, oh that's better. That's what you're doing. Are you going to get into a big self judgment thing about that? That's essentially what we're doing. Why? So that's one way of thinking about it, is to take the pressure off in the view. It's something we're just kind of like, okay, here's this body experience, here's this mind experience, here are these, you know, everything involved in that, here's this energy body, what will help to make it feel good? And it's just not a big deal. And you play with that until it feels good or to maximize how good it feels. Another level, and coming back to the Eros thing, the view of the self on the path, we do want that, or it's possible that that can be a real sense of blessedness, of gift, humility, desire, love, image of the tradition, image of the Buddha, image of teachers, image of self on path. All this becomes imaginal in the thoughtfully soul making sense of the word. And it will still, as the Buddha said, it will still have pain at times. There will still be distress, frustration, disappointment, tightness. The distress of the contemplative, he calls it. But that's part, that can be there, and it's part of the cut of Eros. It's part of the bigger soul making fantasy. But for those of you who know about soul making, I'm not going to explain all that now. We need to have a sense of the self on the path, an image, a construal of the self as practitioner on the path in a way that's nourishing, in a way that really makes sense that holds us well through all the ups and downs. So all this that we're touching on today, all this is relevant to and even causes the different and various difficulties we encounter in practice. Again, we tend to have such a narrow view of what we need to do. All this business is oftentimes actually causal of the difficulties and more causal than what we tend to think of as the problem. Inability to access jhana. Again, I can think of one meditator, there's actually a few, meditating for decades, decades, decades, decades, lots of retreats, etc. She wants to develop her samadhi, which means for her concentration and focus. My concentration is so bad, which almost everyone says, which is my mind wanderers and my thoughts come and again, she's measuring in terms of exactly what it said, maybe not put those things as priority. How much thought comes is my mind wandering, but she is measuring that way. I need to really get into this before I can do any other kind of practice. I really need to develop my focus. I really need to develop my concentration. Now, actually knowing her fairly well as a student, she actually needs, I would say, much more important than she needs to develop her focus and to keep her mind steady on something and all that. Actually what needs to happen is an inquiry and exploration or a development in practice of being able to give herself fully to something. That's a very different thing. What is it to really show up? I give myself, now there's a kind of, I give myself, I really care about this. There's a kind of macro and there's this micro level, like when I did the sunbathing thing. Opening, surrendering, the issue, I would say, is more with that. It's not about keeping the mind steady and her ability to do that. The reason she can't do that is because there's something in her that is holding back and energetically, heartfully, in terms of her soul, in her life as well, in terms of opening and surrendering. For her, there's very rarely any kind of build up of energy in the being. Something's just blocking it. Something won't open to it. Energy is not permitted to gather. Actually those are the primary issues. Those are the primary causes of inability to deepen and somatic access there. But just seeing in a very different way, so it's a different view. You can also see, one can also see, and we've talked about it, you see some of these very same issues manifesting in her life. It's not like, oh, that's just a problem of focus and concentration. It's this kind of issue about allowing energy to gather, about being wholehearted, about really giving herself, getting behind something, about really opening, actually manifesting her life too and cause all kinds of, let's say, limitations. So a shift in view, a shift in understanding, then a shift in emphasis of what am I actually practicing in? What would make a difference? What's important? Again, sometimes, oftentimes human beings, the body isn't open. The energy body as a sort of habit is not so open. Most people wouldn't, it's not obvious when you look, I mean, you get people with really hunched over contracted postures. I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about something much more subtle that's palpable but not obvious to, let's say, most people. Sometimes this has to do with trust. Sometimes it has to do with, and it's related to just also, sometimes you see, oh, the person like that also, for instance, is very hard for them to feel something like devotion. All these things are related. And it's about the concentration, maybe not about the concentration. It's about something else, about the heart and the soul and how the heart and the soul over time shapes or limits a certain kind of typical stance or typical way that the energy body is. Energy body always moves, it's always open and closing but there can be sort of, typically it's just a little bit close so certain things just are not possible. Again, maybe to learn to practice trusting in the opening, trusting and surrendering, just slowly, slowly learning how to do that with the energy, practicing that. Or as I alluded to before, sometimes what happens is people get quite a tightness or overexcitement which might be very, very subtle creeps in right when actually there's a lot of focus, there's a lot of concentration, there's a lot of PT that may be right on the edge of the first Jhana if we even talk about edges but what I want to say is they're thinking too much about edges. And that view is creating, right, there's two black and white over there, if I can just get over there, even if over there is like metaphorically two inches, that will be the Jhana. And it's not, again, it could be a verbal thought, it could be a not verbal thought. And that very black and white view is allowing attention to creep in, an impostor snatch and grasp which causes a problem, a tightness. What about instead just getting into it, getting into what is there that is lovely and enjoying that and not worrying about where the boundary is, relishing, really relishing what's here and versus the idea of attaining something and then measuring whether I've attained it. What I'm interested in is just relishing that honey. Last thing, doing good for time today, huh? This is pretty good. Last thing, I mentioned that the Buddha talked or described the Jhanas at times as perception attainments, perception attainments. And what we are doing, I would say, the most fruitful, the truest, the most ontologically valid and the most liberating way of conceiving what we're doing in all this is that we're playing with perception. And in that playing of perception, certain perception attainments will be opened. And that way of viewing, I would say, is much more significant than we're practicing an unwavering attention, we're practicing an intensity of a laser beam attention that dissects like a magnifying glass or that we're simplifying or even that we're playing with energy. So I do talk a lot about energy when I teach. Sometimes it seems to be helpful for a lot of people. Some people really don't like it because it doesn't resonate at all for them and they don't get a sense of it. But then we can relate all this to qigong and all that. There is a, it makes sense to talk about energy. But very often then we can think, we can kind of get locked in a certain view that we're really doing something here with the energy or with the energy body or with the body or with the chakras or with the whatever it is. We're getting the energy body to this or that state of energy or whatever. And that becomes locked as a view. I'm working on this contraction, I'm whatever it is, I'm opening the energy here. So sometimes that's really, really helpful as a view. And we can talk in energetic terms in some of these examples of difficulties. Actually you see, talk about them in energetic terms and how they relate to life. And sometimes a person has just, you've had enough of that kind of thinking and it's not the final truth of what's going on. It's just a certain way of, a way of conceiving it, a way of construing it, a way of perceiving it. So this idea of perception attainment and the idea of playing with perception, that's the most radical shift of conceptual framework and the most important shift of conceptual framework that you could make and really understand what that means and use that in a way that's actually fruitful rather than just a yeah, yeah, yeah. It has everything to do with a radical and deep understanding of emptiness. The jhanas, what we're doing in the jhanas, I didn't explain, I rushed through it at that point in the talk, they will come back to it. But if I start to understand the jhanas as we're playing with perception and then perception attainments are opened through our playing with perception, this integrates completely into our understanding of deep, of the deep emptiness of all things. That's the most important thing in the dharma, I would say. The most important thing in the dharma is perception, understanding perception and playing with perception and you can construe of the whole dharma as actually being primarily interested in that, playing with perception. Everything, even things that sound like they have nothing to do with that, you can understand the whole dharma as basically an exploration of playing with perception and then a taking of certain conclusions and certain liberations from that. What do I mean by perception? Perception, sanya is the Pali word and often it gets translated as something like labelling. That's not at all what I mean when I say perception. By perception I mean I do not mean labelling, green, Sarah, cushion, which is not a cushion, it's a bench. I mean by perception I mean it's an equivalent term for experience or better appearance. So I use these three terms and phenomena interchangeably, phenomena on interchangeably. Perception, appearance, experience, phenomena. So perception attainment is not a labelling attainment. If I were to label sari, banana and kirsten, pomegranate and julian, kiwi. I'm not playing with labels here. I'm playing with the fabrication of experience, the fabrication of appearance. Energy is a fabricated perception, fabricated appearance. It's not energy, it's a certain fabrication of appearance experience. This kind of energy is this kind of fabrication, this kind of conjuring, this kind of weaving and sculpting of appearance and experience. The first jhana is this kind of weaving, conjuring, fabricating of experience, appearance, perception. The eighth jhana is, actually that's a bad example, we'll come back to that later. Papancia involves certain fabricating of experience. Just the normal everyday consciousness is a certain fabrication of perception, experience, appearance. Life is the fabrication of perception, experience, appearance. Meditation is the exploration of the fabrication of perception, experience, appearance. Skill and art in meditation is skill and art in the fabrication and the various fabrications and what they lead to. Do they lead where we want to go? If I want it to lead to unfabricating or skillful fabricating or this kind of liberation or this kind of state or that kind of quality or that kind of energy or that kind of jhana. Perception attainments, that has everything to do with emptiness which has basically is really the fabrication of experience, the fabrication of the sense of existence at different times. So the jhanas are completely woven in to the whole sense of what's most important in the path and it's most a way of conceiving the whole of the dharma. Seeing it that way with that kind of view is very different than other ways we can conceive of what we're trying to do here. And as I said for some of you, okay I do talk a lot about energy and some of you are very happy with that language but it can sometimes get too as if it's a real thing. What would happen if you're one of these people? What would happen to just rethink the whole thing, rethink your practice, rethink energy, rethink jhana, rethink dharma in terms of perception? Which as I said doesn't mean labelling. So it's 5.45. Would you like to end now or are there some questions that it might feel helpful to ask or does it feel like they might be? Just get a sense of who might feel like they might want to ask. But when we take just a few questions, this will be part three. And then, yeah, let's see how that goes. Please consider supporting DharmaSeed with a year-end gift. Your donations allow us to offer these teachings online to all. Visit DharmaSeed.org slash donate to learn more. And thanks.

